Blue: Darby's Comprehensive Review of Dental Hygiene, 9th Edition 
Chapter 10: Infection Control and Prevention and Disease Transmission in Oral Health Care
Chapter Review - Answers and Rationales 
1. D. The municipal water (community) naturally contains Legionella bacteria.  When water and waterlines supplying the dental unit are untreated microbial biofilms form. The water used during the oral treatment was highly contaminated which resulted in the patient contracting legionnaire’s disease.
A. The patient did not transfer pathogens to the DHCP.
B. The DHCP did not transfer pathogens to the patient.
C. Legionella was not transferred from one patient to another patient.
2. D. The mode of disease spread was by airborne infection. Bacterial particles aerosolized in water vapor were inhaled by the patient infecting his lungs.
A. Direct contact involves person to person exposure to bodily tissues/secretions directly with nonintact skin (bare hands).
B. Indirect contact involves injuries with contaminated sharps and contact with contaminated surfaces.
C. Droplet infection involves spatter or spray of microbes onto mucous membranes or nonintact skin.
3. D. The source of the microbes was the pathogens in the dental unit water resulting from untreated dental unit waterlines.
A. The microbes did not originate from the patient’s oral cavity.
B. The hygienist’s hands were gloved and not contaminated.
C. The instruments that were used on this patient were sterile.
4. C. Disease transmission would have been prevented by proper treatment and testing of the dental unit waterlines ensuring that water used in OHC had no more than 500 CFU/mL of aerobic mesophilic heterotrophic bacteria.
A. Disease spread was by airborne infection and did not involve clinical contact surfaces.
B. Disease spread was by airborne infection and did not involve housekeeping surfaces.
D. Disease spread did not involve microbes from the DHCP.
5. A. Legionella bacteria results in legionnaire’s disease.
B. The microbe responsible for the disease is not a prion.
C. The microbe responsible for the disease is not a virus.
D. The microbe responsible for the disease is not a fungus.
6. A. The patient aspirated contaminated water vapor during OHC procedures.
B. Swallowing contaminated water would not have resulted in disease acquisition because legionnaire’s disease affects the lungs and is not acquired through the oral–fecal route.
C. Infiltrating microbes onto nonintact mucosa may have caused an oral infection.
D. Exposing mucous membranes to droplet particles would not result in a lung infection.
7. C. Washing the affected area with soap and water is recommended.
A. Scrubbing with a brush may cause more damage to tissue.
B. Squeezing the injured area has not been proven to be beneficial.
D. Bleach may cause more damage to tissue and is not recommended.
8. D. The employer is responsible for arranging and paying for consultation, testing, and follow-up with a preselected, qualified health care professional (HCP) knowledgeable in post exposure prophylaxis (PEP).
A. According to Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), the employer has some responsibility when the employee is exposed to a bloodborne pathogen.
B. The employer is not responsible for paying for treatment. The employee may get coverage through Worker’s Compensation.
C. OSHA does not mandate time off with pay.
9. B. The hygienist was exposed by indirect contact with a contaminated instrument.
A. Direct contact involves person to person contact exposure to bodily tissues/secretions.
C. Droplet infection involves spatter or spray of microbes onto mucous membranes or nonintact skin.
D. Airborne infection results from breathing in contaminated aerosols.
10. C. The explorer was contaminated and punctured through the hygienist’s exam glove and into his skin.
A. Spray or spatter with contaminated droplets onto mucous membranes did not occur.
B. The microbes did not originate from the hygienist’s hands.
D. Dental unit water was not involved in this exposure.
11. D. None of the above actions is required.
A. Test results are confidential between the employee and the health care provider.
B. The employee’s work file would not include test results as this information is confidential.
C. Mandatory Reporting to the CDC and OSHA is not required of an employee.
12. C. In 2005, OSHA decided that OHC settings are of low hazard and do not have to keep an OSHA injury and illness record unless the government asks for it.
A. Employee vaccine declination statements need to be included.
B. Records of annual staff trainings on infection control need to be kept for 3 years.
D. Employees’ Social Security numbers are included in their work file maintained in an OHC setting.
13. D. The risk for infection after a needlestick or cut exposure to HIV- or HCV-infected blood is very low (less than 2%).
A, B, and C. The risk is very low.
14. D. Varicella zoster is a respiratory pathogen.
A, B, and C. All these are bloodborne pathogens.
15. A. Standard precautions is the term used to delineate blood, all bodily fluids except sweat, mucous membranes, and nonintact skin as potentially infectious.
B. Pervasive precautions is incorrect.
C. Universal precautions only consider that all individuals have the potential to be infected with bloodborne pathogens. Standard precautions include not only blood but also all bodily fluids, nonintact skin, and mucous membranes as potentially infectious.
D. Protective precautions is incorrect.
16. C. Glutaraldehyde is a chemical sterilant, but critical items must be heat sterilized.
A. Critical items must be heat sterilized.
B. Glutaraldehyde is a chemical sterilant.
D. The first statements is true; the second statement is false.
17. D. Tuberculosis resulted from by an airborne transfer of pathogen aerosols emanating from the diseased patient which was inhaled by the DHCP, infecting his/her lungs.
A. Direct contact involves exposure to pathogens with nonintact skin on bare hands; person to person bodily contact
B. Indirect contact results from exposure to pathogens via contaminated instruments or surfaces.
C. Droplet infection results from contaminated liquid droplets from spray or spatter that contact mucous membranes or nonintact skin.
18. C. Chemical vapor sterilization was the only method with adequate time and temperature.
A and D. These methods did not have adequate time.
B. This method did not have adequate temperature.
19. A. The CDC recommends using an intermediate-level disinfectant with a tuberculocidal claim because it will kill all less-resistant bacteria as well.
B, C, and D. Both the statement and the reason are correct.
20. C. The goal of infection control is to prevent infection and disease transmission in the OHC setting.
A. All pathogens cannot be prevented from entering the oral health care setting.
B. Clinical contact surfaces cannot be sterilized but can only be disinfected.
D. Humans have microbes naturally occurring in their bodies; these microbes cannot be eliminated.
21. A. Alcohol hand sanitizers have proven efficacy when compared to handwashing, and may be used in place of handwashing when no visible soil is present.
B, C, D. Both statement and reason are true.
22. D. The use of cassettes is more time efficient because instruments are kept together and organized in a cassette.
A. For patient assurance, cassettes should be unwrapped in front of them.
B. Cassettes are used as instrument trays.
C. Exposure to sharps is decreased because handling loose instruments during processing provides more opportunities for injury to DHCP.
23. C. Many DHCP do experience skin problems related to the use of gloves; however, most of these problems are caused by irritant contact dermatitis and not by an allergic reaction.
A. Most problems are not allergic reactions.
B. Many DHCP do experience nonallergic dermatitis on their hands because of wearing gloves.
D. The first statement is true, but the second statement is false.
24. C. A biologic indicator containing spores is used to determine sterility.
A. An external indicator is put on the outside of packages to determine which items were processed in the sterilizer.
B. An integrated indicator is put on the inside of packages to determine if the package has been exposed to sterilizing conditions.
D. Chemical indicator is another name for external and integrated indicators.
25. A. OSHA is primarily concerned with employee protection from injury and harm in the workplace.
B, C, and D. OSHA is primarily concerned with employee protection in the workplace.
26. C. Packages are dry at the end of chemical-vapor sterilization. This is an advantage over steam sterilization because with steam sterilization, packages are wet at the end of the cycle and extra drying time is needed.
A. With chemical-vapor sterilization a ventilation system is needed because of emission of noxious fumes.
B. Chemical vapor cannot sterilize closed containers.
D. Chemical vapor-sterilization costs more than steam sterilization because of the high cost of chemicals.
27. C. Currently no vaccine is available for HCV.
A. The vaccine for HBV is recommended for all DHCP.
B. The vaccine for HAV is recommended for all DHCP.
D. A vaccine for varicella is recommended for all DHCP who are not already immune to the disease.
28. A. Resident flora on the hands colonize the deep layers of the skin.
B. Resident flora are more resistant to handwashing and cannot be completely eliminated.
C. Transient flora are the primary source of disease transmission.
D. Resident flora are not associated with an allergic response.
29. A. Infectious waste must be identified with the biohazard symbol or “red bagged” and disposed of according to state and federal laws.
B. Infectious waste can never be combined with the regular trash.
C. Infectious waste may be sterilized; but it is not necessary for disposal.
D. Infectious waste requires special handling in all states.
30. D. Gloves should be donned immediately before entering patient's mouth.
A. Gloves used for the operatory set up will become contaminated.
B. The outside of the cassette wrap is not sterile and will contaminate gloves.
C. The blood pressure cuff is not sterile and cannot be adequately disinfected and therefore will contaminate gloves.
31. D. Cloth wrap should not be used in chemical-vapor sterilizers because the cloth will absorb too much chemical and sterilization may not be achieved.
A. Paper wrap can be used.
B. Paper pouches can be used.
C. Plastic pouches can be used.
32. C. Protective barriers are ideally used for surfaces that are difficult to clean.
A. Barriers need to be changed after each patient.
B. Surfaces covered by barriers cannot be sterilized.
D. The use of barriers may increase the cost of maintaining asepsis.
33. D. Intermediate-level disinfectants cannot achieve sterilization under any circumstances.
A. Intermediate-level disinfectants must be tuberculocidal.
B. Intermediate-level disinfectants that are tuberculocidal will kill all less-resistant microorganisms.
C. Intermediate-level disinfectants must be used on surfaces with visible blood.
34. D. Not all DHCPs will seroconvert when vaccinated with the hepatitis B vaccine. Some DHCP are non-responders and will never seroconvert. The CDC does not recommend booster injections because insufficient data exist to warrant boosters currently.
A. Not all DHCP will seroconvert when vaccinated with the hepatitis B vaccine. Some DHCP are non-responders and will never seroconvert.
B. The CDC does not recommend booster injections because insufficient data exist to warrant boosters at this time.
C. The first statement is false; the second statement is true.
35. C. Face shields do provide maximum coverage for the face; however, masks should also be worn for protection against inhalation of aerosols.
A. Facemasks are still required to be worn with face shields.
B. Face shields do provide maximum coverage for the face.
D. Face shields do provide maximum coverage for the face; however, masks should also be worn to protect from inhalation of aerosols.
36. A. Pseudomonas aeruginosa occurs naturally in water and can multiply inside dental unit waterlines sufficient enough to cause oral infections in immunocompromised patients.
B. Neisseria meningitidis causes meningitis; it is not found in DUW.
C. Candida albicans causes fungal infections; it is not found in DUW.
D. T. pallidum causes syphilis; it is not found in DUW.
37. B. The FDA regulates the safety and effectiveness of medical devices including sterilizers and ultrasonic units.
A. The EPA approves surface disinfectants and the removal of infectious waste.
C. The CDC is a regulatory agency involved in health promotion and disease prevention.
D. The OSHA is responsible for protecting the health and safety of the U.S. workforce.
38. A. A hepatitis B titer is recommended 2 months after the third injection to ensure seroconversion and immunity. Some individuals may never seroconvert and are considered non-responders.
B. An individual should be tested for immunity, as not all individuals will seroconvert.
C. Not all individuals will gain immunity.
D. A hepatitis B titer is recommended 2 months after the third injection to ensure immunity.
39. A. Biologic monitors containing spores of Geobacillus stearothermophilus are used to determine the sterility of items that have been processed in the steam autoclave.
B. Biologic monitors containing spores of Bacillus atrophaeus are used to determine the sterility of items that have been processed in the dry-heat oven.
C. Biologic monitors containing spores of Bacillus atrophaeus are used to determine sterility of items that have been processed in the ethylene oxide gas.
D. Biologic monitors containing spores of Bacillus atrophaeus are used to determine sterility of items that have been processed during rapid-heat transfer (same as dry-heat oven only faster turn-around time).
40. B. Hand scrubbing of instruments in general and especially without utility gloves is considered unsafe and is not recommended.
A. Instrument cassettes decrease the handling of contaminated instruments that occur with the use of autoclave bags.
C. Using a one-handed technique to recap needles is recommended as a safe practice.
D. Fulcruming “out of the line of fire” or not on the same tooth being instrumented is recommended in case of slippage.
41. C. Sterilization failure is most often caused by too many packages loaded into the sterilizer or not loaded correctly to allow steam to penetrate.
A. It is less likely that the autoclave is malfunctioning.
B. It is less likely that materials were improperly packaged.
D. It is less likely that the timer was set incorrectly.
42. C. Chemical indicators are used to identify items that have been processed through the sterilizers; however, chemical indicators cannot determine sterility. Only biologic indicators can ensure sterility.
A. Chemical indicators cannot determine sterility.
B. Chemical indicators are used to identify items that have been processed through the sterilizers.
D. Chemical indicators are used to identify items that have been processed through the sterilizers; however, chemical indicators cannot determine sterility.
43. C. Dental handpieces are semi-critical items but must be able to withstand heat sterilization.
A. Dental handpieces must not be wiped with a disinfectant because chemicals cannot penetrate the inner components of handpieces and they must be heat sterilized.
B. Dental handpieces are semi-critical items because they do not penetrate bone or soft tissue.
D. Dental handpieces are semi-critical items but cannot be disinfected and must be sterilized.
44. B. The maximum level of bacteria allowed by the CDC guidelines is 500 colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL) of aerobic bacteria.
A. The actual amount is higher.
C and D. The level of bacteria allowed is lower.
45. D. The number of bacteria in water from untreated DUWL is always considerably higher than in drinking water because of the accumulation of biofilm in small-diameter DUWL.
A, B, and C. The number of bacteria in water from untreated DUWL is always considerably higher than in drinking water because of the accumulation of biofilm in small-diameter DUWL.
46. D. Saliva contaminated exam gloves are not considered regulated waste.
A. Extracted teeth are regulated waste.
B. Blood-soaked gauze is regulated waste.
C. Needles or sharps are regulated waste.
47. C. The primary reason to use a preprocedural rinse is to reduce microbial load in aerosols that may be inhaled by a DHCP.
A. Fresh breath is not the primary reason.
B. Food debris may be eliminated but is not the primary reason for rinsing.
D. Oral infections may be reduced but not entirely eliminated.
48. B. Biologic monitors are recommended for use on a weekly basis to test for sterility.
A. Once a day is not recommended.
C. Once a month is too infrequent.
D. Once a quarter is too infrequent.
49. A. Flushing waterlines helps reduce planktonic bacteria but does not significantly reduce biofilm in DUWL.
B. Independent water reservoirs are recommended, as these will inhibit biofilm formation.
C. Chemical disinfection of waterlines is recommended, as it will inhibit biofilm formation.
D. Sterile water delivery systems are recommended for surgical procedures, as they will inhibit biofilm formation.
50. D. Work practice controls are procedures that reduce the likelihood of exposure to potentially infectious materials.
A. Standard bioburden control is not the correct term.
B. Safe practice control is not the correct term.
C. Engineering control is a device that reduces the risk of exposure to potentially infectious materials.
51. A. N95 respirator provides the best protection during aerosol generating procedures. 
B. and C. Level 1 and 2 masks do not provide adequate protection
D. Level 3 mask with a face shield provides more protection and should be used if a N95 is unavailable
 
52. C. The new definition of fever is 100.0˚F or higher according to the CDC Interim Infection Control Recommendations for patients suspected of COVID-19.
A. and B. Temperature is considered within normal range
D. A temperature of 100.4˚F or higher was the benchmark for fever prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
 
53. C. For routine preventive care, patients exhibiting symptoms of an acute respiratory infection should be rescheduled. 
A. Standard precautions are not sufficient to prevent disease transmission via inhalation
B. Most dental practices are not equipped with isolation rooms
D. A N95 respirator provides increased protection from inhalation of aerosols; however, because the patient is scheduled for preventive and not emergency care, the best course of action would be to postpone care until the patient’s symptoms have resolved.