Chapter 10 Review Questions
Answers and rationales to review questions are available on this text’s accompanying Evolve site. See inside front cover for details.

1. Which of these groups is a regulatory body?
a. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
b. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
c. The Association for Dental Safety (ADS)
d. The American Dental Association (ADA)
 2. Which of these groups provides evidence-based recommendations?
a. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
b. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
c. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
d. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
 3. Which of these strains of Hepatitis is NOT bloodborne?
a. Hepatitis A
b. Hepatitis B
c. Hepatitis C
d. Hepatitis D
 4. Which of these is considered a critical item according to the Spaulding classification?
a. Blood pressure cuff
b. Mouth mirror
c. Radiograph sensor
d. Dental hygiene curette
 5. Which of these is considered a semicritical item according to the Spaulding classification?
a. Blood pressure cuff
b. Mouth mirror
c. Extraction forceps
d. Dental hygiene curette
 6. Which of these is considered a noncritical item according to the Spaulding classification?
a. Blood pressure cuff
b. Mouth mirror
c. Radiograph sensor
d. Dental hygiene curette
 7. A sneeze or a cough is an example of:
a. Source of microbe or pathogen
b. A portal of entry
c. A portal of exit
d. A vulnerable host
 8. All of these are work restrictions for a dental health care worker EXCEPT one. Which is the EXCEPTION?
a. Conjunctivitis
b. Pediculosis
c. Measles
d. Headache
 9. Which best describes engineering controls?
a. Devices to reduce the risk of exposure incidents
b. Actions or behaviors that reduce the risk of exposure incidents
c. Personal protective equipment that reduce the risk of exposure incidents
d. All of the above
 10. All of the following are examples of work practice controls EXCEPT one. Which is the EXCEPTION?
a. Self-sheathing needles
b. One-handed scoop technique for recapping a needle
c. Maintaining a 14–18-inch working distance to reduce droplets
d. Fulcruming one to four teeth away from tooth being treated
 11. According to transmission-based precautions, where would a patient with active tuberculosis be treated?
a. In the doctor’s treatment room
b. In the dental hygienist’s operatory
c. In an airborne isolation room
d. In a hospital dental clinic
 12. According to standard precautions, all of the following are considered potentially infectious EXCEPT one. Which is the EXCEPTION?
a. Blood
b. Nonintact skin
c. Sweat
d. Mucous membranes
 13. Which of the following immunizations are recommended for dental health care workers?
a. Shingles
b. Hepatitis A and B
c. Pneumonia
d. Polio
 14. When should antibody follow-up testing occur for the Hepatitis B vaccine?
a. 1–2 months after the final injection
b. 3–4 months after the final injection
c. 4–6 months after the final injection
d. 1–2 years after the final injection
 15. Hand hygiene should be performed at all of these times EXCEPT one. Which is the EXCEPTION?
a. Before gloving (donning)
b. After gloves are removed (doffing)
c. After using the restroom
d. Before using the restroom
 16. Choose the correct sequence for donning personal protective equipment (PPE).
a. Protective clothing (lab coat or gown), mask & eyewear, hand hygiene, then gloves
b. Mask & eyewear, hand hygiene and gloves, then protective clothing (lab coat or gown)
c. Protective clothing (lab or gown), hand hygiene and gloves, then mask & eyewear
d. Mask & eyewear, protective clothing (lab coat or gown), then hand hygiene and gloves
 17. Which types of gloves should be used during instrument reprocessing?
a. Nonsterile examination gloves
b. Sterile surgical gloves
c. Utility gloves
d. Overgloves (food handler’s gloves)
 18. Latex allergy is which type of reaction?
a. Type I immediate
b. Type II Cytotoxic
c. Type III Immune Complex
d. Type IV delayed
 19. Which type of surface disinfectant should be used to wipe clinical contact surfaces that might be contaminated with blood or other potentially infectious material (OPIM)?
a. High level
b. Intermediate level
c. Low level
d. None of the above
 20. Intermediate-level disinfectants carry all of these kill claims EXCEPT one. Which is the EXCEPTION?
a. C. difficile
b. HIV
c. Hepatitis B
d. S. aureus
 21. Which of the following is NOT considered a clinical contact surface?
a. Chair controls
b. Bracket tray
c. Floors
d. Saliva ejector control
 22. Which organization regulates chemical disinfectants?
a. FDA
b. CDC
c. OSHA
d. EPA
 23. Dental Unit Water Lines measured in colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL) must not exceed which level of bacterial contamination?
a. 50 CFU/mL
b. 100 CFU/mL
c. 500 CFU/mL
d. 1000 CFU/mL
 24. What is the first action that should be taken when a percutaneous (sharps injury) happens?
a. Wash the area with soap and water
b. Yell for help
c. Report the injury
d. Get an HIV test
 25. Where should blood-soaked or blood-saturated items should be discarded?
a. In the trash can at the front desk
b. In the operatory
c. In a biohazard container
d. In the sterilization area trash can
 26. How soon should a dental health care worker seek medical care after an exposure incident?
a. Within one hour
b. Within two hours
c. Within four hours
d. Within 24 hours
 27. All of the following are acceptable methods of cleaning for removing debris or bioburden from instruments prior to sterilization EXCEPT one. Which is the EXCEPTION?
a. Hand scrubbing with a short-handled brush
b. An ultrasonic bath
c. An instrument washer
d. An instrument washer/disinfector
 28. Autoclave tape is an example of which type of chemical indicator?
a. Class I
b. Class II
c. Class III
d. Class VI
 29. The best place to store instruments after sterilization is_______________?
a. unwrapped in the sterilization drawer.
b. unwrapped in the dental operatory.
c. wrapped in a drawer in the operatory.
d. wrapped on a shelf above the autoclave.
 30. How frequently should biological monitoring with chemical indicators occur?
a. At least every hour
b. At least daily
c. At least weekly
d. At least monthly
 31. Which type of chemical indicator should be placed inside of a wrapped instrument cassette?
a. Class I
b. Class II
c. Class IV
d. Class V
 32. All of the following methods inhibit the formation of biofilm in dental unit water lines EXCEPT one. Which is the EXCEPTION?
a. Flushing water lines for 2 minutes
b. Independent water reservoir
c. Chemical disinfection of water lines
d. Sterile-water delivery systems
 33. Which governmental agency is responsible for approving the safety and effectiveness of small office sterilizers and ultrasonic units?
a. EPA
b. FDA
c. CDC
d. OSHA
 34. What is the ultimate goal of disease prevention in the oral health care (OHC) setting?
a. Prevent pathogens from entering the OHC setting.
b. Sterilize clinical contact surfaces between patients.
c. Prevent OHC related infections and disease.
d. Eliminate all microbes in the OHC setting.
 35. A dental health care worker has occupationally acquired tuberculosis. Which of the following modes of transmission would be implicated in this case?
a. Direct contact
b. Indirect contact
c. Droplet infection
d. Airborne infection
 36. Which term is used for the practice of treating a patient’s blood, body fluids, nonintact skin, and mucous membranes as potentially infectious?
a. Standard precautions
b. Pervasive precautions
c. Universal precautions
d. Protective precautions
 37. Today, effective vaccines are available to prevent which of the following infections?
a. HIV
b. Hepatitis C
c. Hepatitis B
d. Herpes simplex
 38. Which of the following is an example of an engineering control?
a. Eyewear
b. Sharps container
c. Using a one-handed scoop technique for recapping a needle
d. Handwashing
 39. Which of the following is not a link in the chain of infection?
a. A pathogen in sufficient number
b. A mode of transmission for the pathogen
c. An immune host
d. A portal of entry into a new host
e. A reservoir for the pathogen
 40. A person who is immune/recovered from a disease but can still transmit the disease is called:
a. A susceptible host
b. A source patient
c. A carrier
d. An at-risk dental health care worker
 41. All of the following tasks should be conducted to maintain high-quality dental unit water EXCEPT one. Which is the EXCEPTION?
a. Use heated water for patient comfort.
b. Flush water lines for 20–30 seconds between patients.
c. Use low-level chemical germicides in dental unit water lines.
d. Periodically test the CFU/mL level in dental unit water.
 42. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that all dental offices have a designated person who handles infection control training records, monitors infection control policies and procedures, and who communicates updates about infection control policies and procedures. This person is known as the __________________.
a. OSHA monitor
b. Infection control coordinator
c. Infection Manager
d. CDC Monitor


ANSWERS:


Chapter Review - Answers and Rationales 

	1.	A. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is a regulatory body. 
b.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). CDC is an advisory body only.
c.The Association for Dental Safety (ADS) is a professional association.
d.The American Dental Association (ADA) is a professional association.

	2.	B. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is an advisory body that provides evidence-based recommendations.
	a.	The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is regulatory body.
	c.	The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is regulatory (chemicals)
	d.	The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is regulatory (devices)

	3.	A. Hepatitis A is fecal/oral route transmission, not bloodborne
b. Hepatitis B is bloodborne
c. Hepatitis C is bloodborne
	d.	Hepatitis D is bloodborne
 
	4.	D. Dental hygiene curette is a critical item because it penetrates tissues
	a.	Blood pressure cuff is a non-critical item as it only touches skin
	b.	Mouth mirror is a semi-critical item as it touches mucous membranes but does not penetrate
	c.	Radiograph sensor is a semi critical item as it touches mucous membranes but does not penetrate

	5.	B. Mouth mirror is a semi-critical item because is touches mucous membranes but does not penetrate.
	a.	Blood pressure cuff is a non-critical item as it only touches skin
	c.	Extraction forceps are critical as they penetrate tissues
	d.	Dental hygiene curettes are critical as they penetrate tissues

	6.	A. Blood pressure cuff is considered non-critical as it only touches skin.
	b.	Mouth mirror is considered semi-critical as it touches mucous membranes.
c. Radiograph sensor is considered semi-critical as it touches mucous membranes.
d. Dental hygiene curettes are critical as they penetrate tissues

	7.	C. A portal of exit is a way for pathogens to get OUT of a patient
	a.	Source of microbe or pathogen is a patient with a disease
	b.	A portal of entry is a way for pathogens to get into a patient
d. A vulnerable host is a person that has the potential to acquire a disease

	8.	D. Headache is NOT a CDC work restriction
	a.	Conjunctivitis is a CDC work restriction
	b.	Pediculosis is a CDC work restriction
	c.	Measles is a CDC work restriction 

	9.	A. Devices to reduce the risk of exposure incidents
	b.	Actions or behaviors that reduce the risk of exposure incidents (actions/behaviors are not devices).
	c.	Personal protective equipment that reduce the risk of exposure incidents (PPE not a device)
	d.	All options are correct (incorrect)

	10.	A. Self-sheathing needles are devices not behaviors
	b.	One handed scoop technique for recapping a needle is a work practice behavior
	c.	Maintaining a 14-18 inch working distance to reduce droplets is a work practice behavior
	d.	Fulcruming one to four teeth away from tooth being treated is a work practice behavior 


	11.	C. In an airborne isolation room (TB is treated in an isolation room)

	a.	In the doctor’s treatment room (not an airborne isolation room)
	b.	In the dental hygienist’s operatory (not an airborne isolation room)
d.In a hospital dental clinic (not an airborne isolation room)

	12.	C. Sweat is not potentially infectious 
	a.	Blood is potentially infectious
	b.	Non-intact skin is potentially infectious
d.Mucous membranes is potentially infectious

	13.	B. Hepatitus A and B is a recommended vaccine for DHCW
A. Shingles is not a recommended vaccine for DHCW
C. Pneumonia is not a recommended vaccine for DHCW
D. Polio is not a recommended vaccine for DHCW

	14.	A. 1 to 2 months after the final injection is the recommendation

	b.	3-4 months after the final injection (incorrect answer)
	c.	4-6 months after the final injection (incorrect answer)
	d.	1 to 2 years after the final injection (incorrect answer)

	15.	D. Before using the restroom (hand hygiene is NOT recommended at this time)

	a.	Before gloving (donning) (hand hygiene is recommended at this time)
	b.	After gloves are removed (doffing) (hand hygiene is recommended at this time)
	c.	After using the restroom (hand hygiene is recommended at this time)

	16.	A. Protective clothing (lab coat or gown), mask & eyewear, hand hygiene, then gloves. (this is correct sequence).
	b.	Mask & eyewear, hand hygiene and gloves, then protective clothing (lab coat or gown). (this sequence is incorrect)
	c.	Protective clothing (lab or gown), hand hygiene and gloves, then mask & eyewear. (this sequence is incorrect)
	d.	Mask & eyewear, protective clothing (lab coat or gown), then hand hygiene and gloves (this sequence is incorrect)

	17.	C. Utility gloves are used because they are puncture resistant

	a.	Nonsterile examination gloves (incorrect-these are used during routine non-surgical treatment)
	b.	Sterile surgical gloves (incorrect-these are used during surgical procedures)
d. Over gloves (food handler’s gloves) (incorrect, as these are used over nonsterile gloves to prevent cross contamination).

	18.	A. Latex allergy is which type of reaction?
	a.	Type I immediate correct answer
	b.	Type II Cytotoxic incorrect answer
	c.	Type III Immune Complex incorrect answer
	d.	Type IV delayed incorrect answer

	19.	
	a.	High level incorrect because it is immersion only for items that cannot withstand heat, not a surface disinfectant
	b.	Intermediate level correct because it kills HIV, HepB, and test organism M. Tuberculosis, a highly resistant organism
	c.	Low level incorrect because it does not have a TB kill claim
	d.	No options are correct (incorrect)

	20.	
	a.	C. difficile is not killed with intermediate level disinfection
	b.	HIV is killed by intermediate level disinfection
	c.	Hepatitis B is killed by intermediate level disinfection
	d.	S. aureus is killed by intermediate level disinfection

	21.	
	a.	Chair controls are clinical contact surfaces
	b.	Bracket tray is a clinical contact surface
	c.	Floors are housekeeping surfaces, not clinical contact surfaces
	d.	Saliva ejector control are clinical contact surfaces

	22.	
	a.	FDA regulates devices
	b.	CDC provides evidence-based recommendations and is advisory not regulatory
	c.	OSHA regulates worker safety
	d.	EPA regulates chemicals used in the United States

	23.	
	a.	50 CFU/mL (incorrect, can be up to 500 CFU)
	b.	100 CFU/mL (incorrect, can be up to 500 CFU)
	c.	500 CFU/mL (correct, cannot exceed 500 CFU)
	d.	1000 CFU/mL (incorrect, cannot be more than 500 CFU)

	24.	
	a.	Wash the area with soap and water (first step in the process)
	b.	Yell for help (incorrect and not part of the appropriate steps)
	c.	Report the injury (incorrect, this is the second step)
	d.	Get an HIV test (incorrect, this is a later step in the process along with Hepatitis B testing)

	25.	
	a.	In the trash can at the front desk (incorrect, blood soaked or saturated must discard in biohazard waste)
	b.	In the operatory (incorrect, blood soaked or saturated must discard in biohazard waste)
	c.	In a biohazard container (correct place to discard blood soaked or saturated)
	d.	In the sterilization area trash can (incorrect, blood soaked or saturated must discard in biohazard waste)

	26.	
	a.	Within one hour (can go during this time but needs to be within 2 hours)
	b.	Within two hours (must go within 2 hours)
	c.	Within four hours (incorrect, 4 hours exceeds the 2-hour limit)
	d.	Within 24 hours (incorrect, 4 hours exceeds the 2-hour limit)

	27.	
	a.	Hand scrubbing with a short-handled brush is NOT recommended by CDC to avoid a percutaneous (sharps) injury
	b.	An ultrasonic bath (is acceptable method for cleaning)
	c.	An instrument washer (is acceptable method for cleaning)
	d.	An instrument washer/disinfector (is acceptable method for cleaning)

	28.	
	a.	Class I is correct because it is a single parameter (heat) autoclave tape is an example
	b.	Class II is incorrect because it is a specific test like Bowie-Dick
	c.	Class IV is incorrect because it is a multi-parameter indicator like a pouch
	d.	Class V is incorrect because it is a multi-parameter indicator like an integrator inside a cassette.

	29.	
	a.	unwrapped in the sterilization drawer. Incorrect, instrument must be stored wrapped and unopened until the point of use.
	b.	unwrapped in the dental operatory. Incorrect, instrument must be stored wrapped and unopened until the point of use. 
	c.	wrapped in a drawer in the operatory. Correct because it must stay wrapped in a cool dry area away from the sterilizer
	d.	wrapped on a shelf above the autoclave. Incorrect because it must be stored in a cool dry area away from the sterilizer.

	30.	
	a.	At least every hour (incorrect, unnecessary)
	b.	At least daily (can be done daily, but incorrect according to CDC recommendations)
	c.	At least weekly (correct per CDC recommendations as a MINIMUM)
	d.	At least monthly (incorrect, too infrequent)

	31.	
	a.	Class I (incorrect because this is a single parameter like autoclave tape)
	b.	Class II (incorrect because it is a specific test like Bowie-Dick
	c.	Class IV (incorrect because this is a multiple parameter like a pouch)
	d.	Class V (correct because it is a multiparameter integrator that is placed inside a cassette)

	32.	
	a.	Flushing water lines for 2 minutes (flushing alone does not reduce biofilm)
	b.	Independent water reservoir (Is an acceptable method for reducing biofilm)
	c.	Chemical disinfection of water lines (Is an acceptable method for reducing biofilm)
	d.	Sterile water delivery systems (Is an acceptable method for reducing biofilm)

	33.	
	a.	EPA incorrect regulatory agency governing chemicals in the US
	b.	FDA correct agency that regulates equipment and devices
	c.	CDC incorrect as CDC provides evidence-based recommendations advisory not regulatory
	d.	OSHA incorrect, regulates worker safety

	34.	
	a.	Prevent pathogens from entering the OHC setting. (Incorrect, cannot stop pathogens completely)
	b.	Sterilize clinical contact surfaces between patients. (incorrect, cannot sterilize surfaces-can only disinfect)
	c.	Prevent OHC related infections and disease. Correct answer
	d.	Eliminate all microbes in the OHC setting. (Incorrect, cannot stop pathogens completely)

	35.	
	a.	Direct contact TB is airborne inhalation. Direct contact involves exposure to pathogens with nonintact skin on bare hands; person to person bodily contact
	b.	Indirect contact TB is airborne inhalation not direct contact-results from exposure to pathogens via contaminated instruments or surfaces.
	c.	Droplet infection TB is airborne inhalation not direct contact- results from contaminated liquid droplets from spray or spatter that contact mucous membranes or nonintact skin.
	d.	Airborne infection this correct TB is airborne because it is inhaled into lungs

	36.	
	a.	Standard Precautions is correct because it adds an additional layer including saliva
	b.	Pervasive precautions is incorrect
	c.	Universal precautions is incorrect because it does not include saliva
	d.	Protective precautions is incorrect

	37.	
	a.	HIV is incorrect as there is no vaccine for this
	b.	Hepatitis C is incorrect as there is no vaccine for this, although it is treatable with medications.
	c.	Hepatitis B
	d.	Herpes simplex is incorrect as there is no vaccine for this

	38.	
	a.	Eyewear is incorrect because it is PPE not a device
	b.	Sharps container is correct because it is a safety device
	c.	Using a one-handed scoop technique for recapping a needle is incorrect as this is a work-practice control (safe behavior)
	d.	Hand washing is incorrect as this is a behavior and not a device

	39.	
	a.	A pathogen in sufficient number. (this is a link in the chain)
	b.	A mode of transmission for the pathogen. (this is a link in the chain)
	c.	An immune host. (this is a link in the chain)
	d.	A portal of entry into a new host. (this is a link in the chain)
	e.	A reservoir for the pathogen. (this is a link in the chain)

	40.	
	a.	A susceptible host. (incorrect because they have not had the disease)
	b.	A source patient. (incorrect because they have not had the disease)
	c.	A carrier. (Correct because they carry the disease)
	d.	An at-risk dental health care worker. (Incorrect)

	41.	
	a.	Use heated water for patient comfort. Correct answer-heated water is NOT recommended because it can easily grow biofilm.
	b.	Flush water lines for 20-30 seconds between patients. (This helps maintain high quality water)
	c.	Use low-level chemical germicides in dental unit water lines. (This helps maintain high quality water)
	d.	Periodically test the CFU/mL level in dental unit water. (This helps maintain high quality water)

	42.	
	a.	OSHA monitor (OM) incorrect, no such title exists
	b.	Infection control coordinator (ICC) this is correct from CDC recommendations
	c.	Infection Manager (IM) incorrect, no such title exists
	d.	CDC Monitor (CDCM) incorrect, no such title exists