Blue: Darby's Comprehensive Review of Dental Hygiene, 9th Edition
Chapter 11: Pharmacology
Chapter Review - Answers and Rationales 
1. A. β-adrenergic agonists such as albuterol can cause dry mouth and a sore throat when administered via an oral, metered-dose inhaler. The dry, albuterol mist can be irritating which causes the dry mouth and sore throat.
B. Montelukast will not cause a sore throat or dry mouth.
C. Fluticasone does not cause a sore throat or dry mouth.
D. Aspirin will not cause a sore throat or dry mouth.
2. A. Albuterol is a short-acting bronchodilator administered via inhaler. It is recommended to treat sudden breathing problems in people with COPD. 
B. Both statements are true.
C. Both statements are true.
D. Both statements are true.
3. D. Fluticasone furoate is a corticosteroid that is inhaled by patients with asthma and respiratory problems. Corticosteroids are known to result in oral candidiasis. The dental hygienist should instruct asthmatic patients to rinse after using their inhaler.
A. Cetirizine is a non-sedating antihistamine that is used to treat allergies.
B.  Naproxen is an NSAID that is used to treat pain and inflammation and can cause gingival upset.
C. Aspirin is used to treat pain and inflammation and can cause gingival gastrointestinal upset.
4. E. Avoid acetaminophen. Acetaminophen is probably OK for persons with asthma.
A. Definitely have all patients with asthma bring their rescue inhalers to dental appointments and keep them within reach.
B. Because corticosteroids can promote the growth of oral candidiasis, recommend that the patient rinse with water after using the inhaler.
C. NSAIAs and aspirin should be avoided in patients with asthma because they have been known to precipitate asthma attacks.
D. NSAIAs and aspirin should be avoided in patients with asthma because they have been known to precipitate asthma attacks.
5. C. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) can put the patient at higher risk for developing pneumonia. Fluticasone furoate, a corticosteroid, can weaken the immune system thereby increasing the patient’s risk for developing pneumonia.
A. Vilanterol is a long-acting β2-receptor agonist that does not weaken the immune system.
B. Umeclidinium is a long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist that does not weaken the immune system.
D. Albuterol is a short-acting β2-agonist that does not affect the immune system.
6. B. Albuterol is the bronchodilator of choice.
A. Fluticasone a steroid inhaler that is only used for maintenance therapy. It is NOT fast acting.
C. Vilanterol is a long-acting β2-agonist that is only used for maintenance therapy. It is NOT fast acting.
D. Umeclidinium is a long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist that is only used for maintenance therapy. It is NOT fast acting.
7.A. It is an anticholinergic drug that blocks acetylcholine receptors in the lungs that blocks the smooth muscles in the lungs from tightening.
B. Umeclidinium is a long-acting muscarinic antagonist, it is not a corticosteroid.
C. Umeclidinium is not a corticosteroid, therefore it works by blocking the smooth muscles in the lungs from tightening not by decreasing inflammation in the lungs.
D. Umeclidinium is not a β2-adrenergic agonist. It is a long-acting muscarinic antagonist.
8. B. The inhaler should be discarded once it is used up or at the expiration date listed on the inhaler. Proper use would have the patient discarding the inhaler after all puffs are used.
A. Answer A is correct. Demonstrates proper oral hygiene after using this inhaler.
C. Answer C is also correct. Demonstrates proper oral hygiene after using this inhaler.
D. This combination drug is only used for maintenance therapy.
9. D. Montelukast has several side effects but sedation is not one of them.
A. Mood changes have been reported in patients taking montelukast, especially in teenagers.
B. Headache has been reported in patients taking montelukast.
C. Montelukast can cause gastrointestinal upset. 
10. C. Both cetirizine and fexofenadine are non-sedating H1-blocking drugs. They block histamine receptors in the periphery instead of the central nervous system, thereby causing significantly less sedation than first-generation H1-blocking drugs.
A. The first statement is false, and the second statement is true.
B. The first statement is false, and the second statement is true.
D. The first statement is false, and the second statement is true.
11. C. A thiazide diuretic will cause the patient to lose potassium; therefore, potassium needs to be replenished by foods high in potassium-like orange juice or bananas. A characteristic adverse effect of thiazide diuretics is the loss of K+ and potential hypokalemia. Bananas and orange juice are rich in K+ and are natural and easily accessible sources potassium.
A. Eating a banana or drinking a glass of orange juice when taking a thiazide diuretic will not increase sodium levels.
B. Eating a banana or drinking a glass of orange juice when taking a thiazide diuretic will not increase the rate of diuresis. This has no bearing on the rate of diuresis.
D. Eating a banana or drinking a glass of orange juice when taking a thiazide diuretic does not affect drug absorption.
12. A. Both statements are true. Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors increase potassium levels and thiazide diuretics increase potassium excretion from the body thereby decreasing potassium levels. 
B. Both statements are true.
C. Both statements are true.
D. Both statements are true.
13. B. Both statements are false. Many antihypertensive drugs cause orthostatic hypotension to some extent or another. Getting up at a regular rate may lead to pooling of blood in the extremities and light-headedness. This can be prevented by getting one’s circulation moving and getting up slowly.
A. Both statements are false.
C. Both statements are false.
D. Both statements are false.
14. A. Atorvastatin. Statins such as atorvastatin are HMG CoA reductase inhibitors. They lower serum cholesterol.
B. Niacin is a B vitamin, not an HMG CoA reductase inhibitor.
C. Gemfibrozil is a fibrate, not an HMG CoA reductase inhibitor.
D. Cholestyramine is a bile acid sequestrant, not an HHM CoA reductase inhibitor.
15. D. Cholestyramine is a bile acid-binding resin that inhibits the reabsorption of bile acids from the jejunum and ileum back into the circulation. The body needs to replace these lost bile acids and increases its utilization of cholesterol for this purpose.
A. Clofibrate increases the lipolysis of triglycerides and is a PPARα inhibitor
B. Ezetimibe inhibits the intestinal absorption of cholesterol.
C. Icosapent ethyl is an omega 3-fatty acid that may reduce the synthesis of triglycerides in the liver.
16. C. ACE inhibitors retard the progression of diabetic nephropathy whether hypertension is present or not.
A. Alpha blockers have no effect on the progression of diabetic nephropathy.
B. Diuretics are not recommended in people with diabetes because they can cause hyperglycemia.
D. Although calcium channel blockers can be used to treat hypertension in patients with diabetes that have no effect on diabetic nephropathy. ACE inhibitors would be considered the drug of choice because of their ability to slow the progression of diabetic nephropathy.
17.D. Evolocumab is a PCSK9 inhibitor that lowers LDL cholesterol levels.
A, B, and C. Ticagrelor, rivaroxaban and apixaban, though have different mechanisms of action, all inhibit platelet aggregation.
18. D. The dental team should be prepared to treat an acute anginal attack before treating any patient with a history of angina. The patient's personal nitroglycerin tablets or spray should be available and placed on the bracket table in case of an acute attack. The office should have some nitroglycerine in their emergency kit as well.
A and B. Nitroglycerine is degraded by heat and moisture but not by light. It should be stored in its original brown glass container and tightly closed, because it can be adsorbed by plastic. It should not be kept in the bathroom because the moisture in the air, from showers and bathes, produces moisture that can reduce its effectiveness.
C. In the case of an attack, nitroglycerine should only be administered 3 times within15 minutes. If three tablets do not stop the anginal attack, the patient should be taken immediately to the emergency room with a member of the dental team or an emergency medical expert.
19. A. Both statements are true. Taking nitroglycerine within 24 hours of tadalafil (Cialis) is contraindicated because the combination can cause dangerously low blood pressure.
B. Both statements are true
C. Both statements are true
D. Both statements are true.
20. B. The biguanides, such as metformin, can cause lactic acidosis as a side effect. Predisposing factors to lactic acidosis include alcoholism, binge drinking, and renal or hepatic dysfunction. Metformin is contraindicated in patients with these conditions or who are fasting.
A. Empagliflozin does not produce lactic acidosis as a significant adverse effect.
C. Dulaglutide does not produce lactic acidosis as a significant adverse effect.
D. Linagliptin does not produce lactic acidosis as a significant adverse effect.
21. A. Although HgA1C levels are important it is not necessary for the patient to bring them to their dental appointment. Oral health care helps to lower HgA1C levels and should be performed unless the patient is showing signs of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia.
B, C, and D. These answers are correct. Patients taking sulfonylureas should schedule their dental appointments after mealtimes and after taking their medicine. This will help minimize the risk of hypoglycemia.
22. C. Amitriptyline is a tricyclic antidepressant. It has significant anticholinergic effects and incidence of xerostomia
A, B, and D Fluoxetine, citalopram, and venlafaxine have low anticholinergic action and incidence of xerostomia.
23. D. SSRIs do not have the sedative actions found within many tricyclic antidepressant agents (TCAs). As a class, they tend to be less sedating.
A. Both statements are false.
B. Both statements are false.
C. Both statements are false.
24. B. Acute overdose of acetaminophen can lead to the generation of a toxic metabolite that can cause hepatic necrosis and lead to death.
A. Acetaminophen does not damage the stomach.
C. Acetaminophen does not the esophagus.
D. Acetaminophen does not damage the ears.
25. D. Alcohol stimulates the oxidizing enzymes that metabolize acetaminophen to its toxic metabolite. In this way it increases acetaminophen toxicity.
A. Both statements are false.
B. Both statements are false.
C. Both statements are false.
26. C. Acetaminophen does not appear to have any effects on the heart and is safe to use in patients with hypertension. 
A, B, and D. NSAIDs use should be avoided in patients with hypertension because of the higher risks of adverse cardiac events, including myocardial infarction. The risk increase may increase with a longer duration of use.
27. C. Acetaminophen does not increase lithium levels. 
A. Naproxen, B. Ibuprofen and D. celecoxib are NSAIDS and are known to increase serum levels of lithium.
28. B. Ibuprofen and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs do not cause insomnia.
A, Ibuprofen is known for causing gastrointestinal upset, nausea, and heartburn.
C, Ibuprofen has been reported to cause sedation, especially in elderly patients.
D. NSAIDs such as ibuprofen decrease renal blood flow and increase fluid retention which can cause hypertension.
29. D. Both statements are false. Opioids alter one’s perception of pain and nonopioid analgesics block the pain pathway. Raising the pain threshold decreases the patient’s reaction to pain.
A, B, and C. Both statements are false
30. A. Opioids can stimulate the release of histamine. Itching and urticaria can result from their administration.
B. Although possible, true opioid allergy is rare.
C. Acetaminophen does not affect histamine release.
D. Although possible, a true acetaminophen reaction is rare.
31. A. Naloxone is an opioid antagonist that is used to treat opioid overdose.
B. Flumenazil is a benzodiazepine receptor antagonist and is used to treat benzodiazepine-induced overdose.
C. Codeine is an opioid agonist and is not used to treat opioid overdose. It would only make matters worse.
D. Epinephrine is an α-adrenergic agonist that is used to treat allergic reactions.
32. A. True. Ibuprofen is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug that is effective against pain and inflammation. Roughly 90% of dental pain responds to NSAID treatment.
B, C, and D. Both statements are true.
33. C. The first statement is true. Lorazepam is effective in alleviating the anxiety associated with a dental appointment. The second statement is false because it can impair cognitive abilities.
A. The first statement is true; the second statement is false.
C. The first statement is true, the second statement is false.
D. The first statement is true; the second statement is false.
34. C. Patients taking zolpidem (Ambien) are at risk for experiencing “sleep-driving.” Lowering the dose seems to help reduce the incidence of “sleep driving.”
A. This drug cause sedation and sleep, not insomnia.
B. The drug is sedating and has not been known to cause agitation.
D. Headache is not a reported side effect of this drug.
35. B. A toxic reaction is a predictable, dose-related effect on the target organ.
 A therapeutic effect is the desired predictable and dose-related therapeutic response.
 C. A side effect is a dose-related effect on a non-target organ.
 D. Allergic reactions are neither predictable nor dose-related.
36. C. Metronidazole is unique among anti-infective agents in that it causes an Antabuse-like reaction with alcohol.
A. The combination of metronidazole and alcohol does not cause sedation.
B. The combination of metronidazole and alcohol causes an intense, not mild, headache.
D. The combination of metronidazole and alcohol does not cause any type of insomnia.
37. D. The spleen is not involved in any part of drug excretion or elimination from the body.
A. The kidneys are primarily responsible for drug elimination from the body.
B. A small percentage of drugs can be eliminated via the lungs. 
C. A small percentage of drugs can be eliminated via saliva.
38. B. While NSAIDs, such as ibuprofen, can cause some sedation, they do not require specific cautions regarding their ability to cause sedation.
A. NSAIDS carry caution notices because they appear to increase the risk for serious cardiovascular, thrombotic events, myocardial infarction, and stroke.
C. NSAIDs increase the patient’s risk for serious GI adverse events because they block those prostaglandins involved with hemostasis. 
D. Those patients with renal function impairment are at higher risk for adverse reactions with NSAIDs.
39. A. Both statements are true. Chewable carbamazepine is over 50% sugar so that it tastes good enough for a child to chew and swallow the entire tablet. Patients chewing this tablet should floss their teeth, rinse well with water and swallow any remaining medication after each dose.
B. Both statements are true.
C. Both statements are true.
D. Both statements are true.
40. C. Phenytoin can cause gingival hyperplasia and valproate can cause increased bleeding.
A, B, and D. Phenytoin can cause gingival hyperplasia, and valproate can cause increased bleeding.
41. I. Enalapril is an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor which blocks the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II.
42. L. Esomeprazole (Nexium) is proton pump inhibitor which irreversibly bind to the proton pump, resulting in acid suppression lasting > 24 hours.
43. F. Metformin (Glucophage) is a biguanide that works by increasing hepatic and peripheral insulin sensitivity, resulting in decreased hepatic glucose production.
44. G. Canaglifozin (Invokana) is SGLT2 inhibitor which lowers plasma glucose levels by blocking the reabsorption of glucose in the kidneys, causing excess glucose to be eliminated in the kidneys.
45. D. Citalopram (Celexa) is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor which blocks the reuptake of serotonin. 
46. K. Candesartan (Atacand) is an angiotensin receptor that lowers blood pressure by blocking the angiotensin II receptor.
47. H. Nifedipine (Procardia XL) works by inhibiting calcium movement into the cell thereby lowering blood pressure.
48.  A. Ezetimibe (Zetia) lowers cholesterol by inhibiting the intestinal absorption of calcium.
49. C. Cholestyramine (Questran) is a bile acid sequestrant that binds to bile acids and produces an insoluble product that is lost through the gastrointestinal tract. Formation of new bile acids uses up cholesterol which reduces cholesterol levels.
50. M. Ranitidine (Zantac) is a histamine2-receptor blocker that helps to reduce stomach acids.