
Blue: Darby's Comprehensive Review of Dental Hygiene, 9th Edition

Chapter 12: Biochemistry, Nutrition, and Nutritional Counseling

Chapter Review - Answers and Rationales 


1. A. Glucose is a monosaccharide.
B, C, and D. Sucrose, lactose, and maltose are all disaccharides.

2. B. Oligosaccharides are composed of two to six monosaccharide units.
A. Homopolysacchrides are made up of more than six identical monosaccharide units.
C. Dissacharides are composed of two monosaccharide units.
D. This choice is not correct.

3. C. The first statement is true, and the second statement is false. It is true that salivary amylase initiates the initial enzymatic hydrolysis of starch in the mouth. It is false that salivary amylase activates pepsin and denatures proteins in the mouth.

4. B. Bile salts provide emulsification of fats during the digestive process.
A. Brush border enzymes break down disaccharides into monosaccharides and break down dipeptides into amino acids.
C. Pancreatic enzymes break down starch into maltose, proteins into dipeptides, and amino acids and triglycerides into fatty acids plus monoglycerides.
D. Salivary amylase breaks down starch into maltose.

5. B. Sucrose is a disaccharide. It is glucose plus fructose.
A, C, and D. Galactose, glucose, and fructose are monosaccharides.

6. BOTH statements are TRUE. Quantity of sugar consumed is not as great a concern in regards to carcinogenicity as timing and frequency of sugar consumed.  Combining sweets with noncariogenic foods during a meal is less cariogenic than a concentrated exposure to sweets between meals as a snack. 

7. C. Lactic acid is one of the end products of glycolysis. Pyruvate is also an end product.
A. Carbon dioxide is released after the oxidation of acetyl CoA in the tricarboxylic acid cycle or Krebs cycle.
B. ATP is produced during oxidative phosphorylation and electron transport.
D. Water is also produced during oxidative phosphorylation and electron transport.

8. C. Glycogenesis is the process where glycogen is the short term storage form of glucose in the liver and muscle.
A. Glycogenolysis is when stored liver glycogen breakdown occurs.
B. Gluconeogenesis is the synthesis of glucose from noncarbohydrate sources.
D. Glyconeogenesis is the synthesis of glucose from intermediary metabolites such as pyruvic acid.

9. B. Both statements are false. Anabolic hormones do not raise the blood glucose levels—they lower blood glucose levels. Catabolic hormones do not lower the blood glucose levels-they raise blood glucose levels.

10. B. Catabolic hormones are metabolic regulators of gluconeogenesis. Steroid hormones stimulate the synthesis of glucose from noncarbohydrate substances.
A. The anabolic hormone insulin lowers blood glucose level.
C. Anabolic hormones increase glycogenesis.
D. Anabolic hormones increase lipogenesis.

11. A. Oat bran is a soluble fiber.
B. Cellulose is an insoluble fiber.
C. Hemi-cellulose is an insoluble fiber.
D. Lignin is an insoluble fiber.

12. C. Lipids are structural components of cell membranes.
A. Carbohydrates provide an energy source of 4 kcal/g.
B. Carbohydrates are protein sparing.
D. Carbohydrates are precursors of structural and functional molecules.

13. A. Both of these statements are true. Congenital absence of lactase enzyme is considered a primary lactose intolerance, and the temporary or permanent loss of lactase enzyme activity as a result of injury or illness is considered a secondary lactose intolerance.

14. D. Aspartame should be avoided by patients who have phenylketonuria.
A. Saccharin is not contraindicated for patients who have phenylketonuria.
B. Acesulfame-K is not contraindicated for patients who have phenylketonuria.
C. Sucralose is not contraindicated for patients who have phenylketonuria.

	•	E. Frequency of intake, form and consistency of foods consumed as well as timing of  foods and beverages consumed can all be contributing factors to increased risk of 
 cavities and decay.
 
	•	D. Encourage her to consume the energy drink all at once within 30 minutes.  It is better to consume acidogenic beverages all at once rather than sipping throughout the day.
	•	Soft drinks are acidogenic and would not be a good alternative to the energy drink.
	•	It is better to drink all at once rather than sip on acidic beverages. 
	•	A starchy food paired with an acidic food/beverage heightens acid production in the mouth.  As the starch is digested by enzymes in the mouth, the smaller particles in combination with pathogenic bacteria in the mouth produces lactic acid which lowers the pH in the mouth and results in demineralization. 
E. Carbonated water is acidogenic and lowers the pH in the oral cavity contributing to increased risk of demineralization.            

17.C. Physiological influences may have an impact on food intake, but this is outside the scope of the dental hygienist and not typically addressed when providing suggested modifications to food intake in the dental setting.  Environmental, social and psychological factors influence our food choices.
A. Environmental influences such as economics (work part time to help with college expenses) and lifestyle (college student with busy academic and work schedule) influence Cecilia’s food choices.
B. Social influences such as family, social pressures and marketing can influence food choices.
D. Psychological influences such as stress, emotions and priorities influence food choices. 

18.D. The first statement is false.  Forms of foods can increase risk of dental caries.  All forms of sugars consumed increase risk but slow dissolving and solid sticky foods are retained on the teeth longer so the oral pH is reduced for longer periods of time in the mouth.  The second statement is true—frequency of foods and beverages consumed as well as when those foods are consumed (with a meal, at the end of a meal or between meals) impact risk.  Sugar foods/beverages consumed with a meal are not as much of a concern as those in between meal or at the end of meal such a dessert or a sugary beverage. 

19 B. Slow dissolving foods such as candies, mints or antacids bathe the teeth with sugar for longer periods of time and keep the oral pH at a critical level for a greater period of time thus increasing potential for demineralization and caries risk. 
A. Banana chips are a sticky and retentive food that also increase risk of caries by minimizing the oral pH in the mouth. Although cariogenic, slow dissolving foods decrease the oral pH for a longer period of time which contributes to greater risk.
C. Cinnamon raisin bagels are a sticky and retentive food that also increase risk of caries by minimizing the oral pH in the mouth. Although cariogenic, slow dissolving foods decrease the oral pH for a longer period of time which contributes to greater risk.
D. Peanut butter crackers are a sticky and retentive food that also increase risk of caries by minimizing the oral pH in the mouth. Although cariogenic, slow dissolving foods decrease the oral pH for a longer period of time which contributes to greater risk.
E. Chocolate banana ice cream is considered a liquid sugar foods-but also has retentive qualities with the chocolate and banana added.  Both liquid sugar and sticky retentive food increase risk of caries by minimizing the oral pH in the mouth. Although each of this are have the potential to increase caries risk when consumed on a regular basis, slow dissolving foods decrease the oral pH for a longer period of time which contributes to greater risk.

20. D. Combining a 3- to 7-day food record with a 24-hour recall method presents a more accurate measure of intake.
A. 24 hour dietary recall is useful for individual counseling but isn’t representative of a “usual” dietary intake.
	•	3-to 7-day food record or diary provides an accurate account of foods consumed. It includes at least one weekend day, depending on number of days the record is documented. 
	•	Dietary Intake Questionnaire elicits specific details regarding how off food items are consumes but this measure of intake works better with large groups in a community setting rather than one on one. 
E. 24-hour dietary recall is useful for individual counseling and a Dietary Intake Questionnaire works better with large groups so wouldn’t be a good choice to combine these two when assessing dietary intake for a single individual. 

21. D. 130 g/day is the recommended daily allowance (RDA) for digestible carbohydrate for adults and children
A. 50 g/day of digestible carbohydrate is a minimum amount that should be consumed to prevent use of body protein as an energy source.
B. 65 g/day of digestible carbohydrate is a minimum amount that should be consumed to prevent use of body protein as an energy source.
C. 100 g/day of digestible carbohydrate is a minimum amount that should be consumed to prevent use of body protein as an energy source.

22. B. Daily injections of insulin are required of individuals with type 1 diabetes.
A. It is recommended individuals with type 2 diabetes follow a specialized diet to maintain blood glucose control.
C. It is recommended individuals with type 2 diabetes do routine blood testing to monitor their blood sugar levels.
D. Medication is often prescribed to individuals with type 2 diabetes to facilitate glucose metabolism.

23. C. Poor appetite is not a symptom of diabetes mellitus. Extreme hunger is a symptom associated with the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.
A. Recurring gingival infections is a sign associated with the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.
B. Excessive thirst is a symptom associated with the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.
D. Frequent urination is a symptom associated with the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.

24. A. Both statements are true. Alcoholism can cause B vitamin depletion. It can also depress the antidiuretic hormone, resulting in a loss of magnesium, potassium, and zinc in urine.

25. B. Both statements are false. Nonessential amino acids can be synthesized by the body and do not need to be provided by the diet. Essential amino acids cannot be synthesized by the body and are found in food of animal origin.

26. A. Iron may be deficient in the ovo-lacto vegetarian diet. It includes milk and egg proteins.
B. Vitamin B12 may be a deficiency concern for a vegan (strict vegetarian) because it can only be found in animal products.
C. Calcium may be a deficiency concern for a vegan (strict vegetarian).
D. Zinc may be a deficiency concern for a vegan (strict vegetarian).

27. A. The linear sequence of the components of amino acids is referred to as primary structure.
B. Secondary structure is a steric interaction of amino acids that close to one another in the linear sequence. Alpha helix and beta helix are examples.
C. Tertiary structure is a steric interaction between amino acids that are far apart in the linear sequence which causes folding and the ultimate functional structure of the protein. Disulfide bonds are an example.
D. Quaternary structure is the steric interaction between subunits of proteins with more than one polypeptide chain. Hemoglobin is an example.

28. C. The first statement is true. Absorption of proteins does occur at the brush border of the microvilli of the small intestine. However, the second statement is false. Absorption occurs by active transport at specific amino acid sites AND by simple diffusion along a concentration gradient.

29. B. Alpha ketoacid is involved in catabolism of proteins. It is used as a metabolic fuel for immediate energy needs or for long term energy storage as fat.
A. Deoxyribonucleic acid is involved in the de novo synthesis of proteins.
C. Messenger ribonucleic acid is involved in the de novo synthesis of proteins.
D. Ribosomal ribonucleic acid is involved in the de novo synthesis of proteins.

30. A. Both statements are true. Positive nitrogen balance is the normal situation for anyone building protein containing tissue. Negative nitrogen balance indicates net protein breakdown.

31. B. Adrenocortical hormones are examples of catabolic hormones.
A. Growth hormone is an example of an anabolic hormone.
C. Insulin is an example of an anabolic hormone.
D. Thyroid hormone is an example of an anabolic hormone.

32. D. The cariogenic potential of foods can be affected by the amount of sugar in food. It is also related to the retentive quality of the food as well as the time foods are beverages are in the mouth.



33. B. Arm muscle circumference is a sensitive indicator of muscle mass that reflects protein stores; determined by measuring arm circumference at the midpoint of the upper arm and by measuring triceps skinfold.
A. Bioelectrical impedance is a predictor of total body fat; lean body mass conducts electricity better than fat mass.
C. Skinfold thickness measurement measures subcutaneous fat in selected areas including triceps and subscapular regions.
D. Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry can be used to distinguish fat mass, fat free mass and bone mineral loss; it is the most accurate method to determine body fat. 
 
34.D. The first statement is false.  Nutrient needs are actually higher because of the destruction of healthy cells and tissues that occurs during cancer treatments.  The body goes into a hypermetabolic state, burning calories more rapidly thus more calories are needed to account for additional energy expended to heal the body. Diet modifications such as enteral or parenteral feedings, high nutrient dense foods and consumption of bland foods to combat nausea and vomiting are commonly prescribed.

35. B. Anorexia is most commonly seen in middle to upper income adolescent females 
who are typically described as perfectionists, overachiever and models of good 
behavior. 
	•	Obesity is not age specific. 40% of adults in the United States are obese and 18.5% of 2-19 year olds are obese.
C.  Bulimia is often found in adolescent females as well but not specific to socioeconomic status.  It is more prevalent than anorexia nervosa.  Individuals with bulimia may appear at or above normal weight. 
D. Other Specified Eating or Feeding Disorder is a category that was developed for those individuals who do not meet the strict criteria for diagnosis of anorexia nervosa, bulimia or binge eating.

36. C Glossitis may occur as a result of nutrient deficiencies; commonly affects the tongue and/or papilla
A. Stomatitis may occur as a result of nutrient deficiencies; most commonly affects oral soft tissues
 B. Cheilosis may occur as a result of nutrient deficiencies; most commonly affects lips and corners of the mouth.
 D. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis often occurs as a result of excessive sugar and caffeine intake, stress, smoking and poor oral hygiene coupled with nutritional deficiencies that result in lower host resistance to bacterial plaque biofilm and bacterial challenges.

37. C. Deficiency symptoms are slow to develop with fat-soluble vitamins. Deficiency symptoms often develop rapidly with water-soluble vitamins.
A. Water soluble vitamins are sensitive to heat, light and oxygen.
B. Water-soluble vitamins are absorbed into the blood by both active and passive transport.
D. Water-soluble vitamins are transported free and unbound.

38. B. Both statements are false. Vitamins are organic substrates that are essential to life. Minerals are inorganic substrates that are essential to life.

39. C. Lipids (fats) have cariostatic properties; they provide a coating on the teeth.

40. B. Vitamin C is a water-soluble vitamin.
A. Vitamin A is a fat-soluble vitamin.
C. Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin.
D. Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin.

41. C. Thermic effect of food is the energy required to digest, absorb, and metabolize food.
A. Basal metabolic rate is a measure of energy required to maintain a living state while at rest and without food.
B. Kilocalories is heat produced to raise the temperature of water.
D. ATP is made during the process of oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria.

42. C. Waist circumference is a more accurate method of determining central or abdominal obesity.
A. Body mass index (BMI) is used to assess obesity based on a specific formula that looks at height and weight in relation to body fat. BMI is not as accurate because it does not differentiate between lean body mass and fat.
B. Ideal body weight uses a simple formula to determine the ideal body weight for men and women. It is not an accurate method of determining central or abdominal obesity.
D. Weighing on a scale is not an accurate method of determining central or abdominal obesity.

43. C. Reduced intake of fruit, vegetables, and meats is common among edentulous individuals or those with limited mastication because of loss of teeth.
A. Dairy intake is not affected. Dairy intake may be limited in the diets of older individuals because of lactose intolerance but not because of limited ability to chew dairy foods.
B. Although whole grains may be reduced in the diets of older people. Grains are soft and easy to chew, so these foods are not commonly eliminated from the diet.
D. Canned fruits and vegetables may be consumed, but generally, fruit and vegetable consumption declines in edentulous individuals or those with limited mastication because of tooth loss.

44. D. Carbohydrates would contribute to demineralization, not remineralization.
A. True. Carbohydrates are the main energy source for oral cariogenic bacteria.
B. True. Streptococcus mutans synthesizes polysaccharides from glucose, which results in increased bacterial plaque formation.
C. True. Lactic acid and pyruvate acids are the end products of glycolysis for acidogenic bacteria. Depending on the conditions, acetyl coenzyme A (CoA) might be produced as well.

45. C. Both statements are true. The oral manifestations of vitamin D include increased caries rate, loss of lamina dura around the roots of the tooth, failure of bones to heal, delayed dentition, and loss of alveolar and mandibular bone. Nutrient excess of vitamin D could result in pulp calcification and enamel hypoplasia.

46. B. Lactose intolerance is the body’s inability to hydrolyze lactose. Individuals may eat fewer milk products, use fermented products, or add a commercial lactose enzyme to their milk. Calcium found in dairy products can also be consumed in supplement form. Margaret takes 600 mg of calcium twice daily, which is the recommended amount for her age. Calcium is also found in other foods such as sardines with bones and fortified breads, cereals, and beverages such as orange juice.
A. GERD can contribute to demineralization and subsequently decay due to the acid reflux keeping the oral cavity more acidic.
C. Energy drink consumption may contribute to demineralization due to the acid as well as carbonation in some products sold.
D. Flavored water consumption can contribute to demineralization and ultimately decay. The citric acid and flavorings that are in flavored waters make the water more acidic. It’s best to consume tap water or plain bottled water.
E. Although a healthy alternative to getting adequate fruits and vegetables in the diet, juicing can contribute to demineralization and subsequent decay due to the acidity of the fruits and vegetables. Crunchy, whole fruits and vegetables are more cleansing.

47. B. Based on Margaret’s BMI of 27.43, she would be classified as overweight (25.0 to 29.9).
A. Individuals with a BMI of 30.0 to 34.9 are categorized as obesity I or with a BMI 35.0 to 39.9 categorized as obesity II.
C. Individuals with a BMI below 8.5 are considered underweight.
D. Individuals with a BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 are considered normal weight.
E. Individuals with a BMI above 40 are categorized as extreme obesity III.

48. D. The first statement is false. The non-direct approach counseling technique would be best used to address Margaret’s dietary concerns in relation to her oral disease risk. In the direct approach, the client is not involved in decision making, so this type of approach is usually not successful for the counselor or the client. The second statement is true.  The counselor (dental hygienist) should provide information on the causes of the dental disease, the role of the diet, and the use of dietary assessment tools with the client (Margaret) as an active participant. There is a greater chance for success if the patient is involved in the process.

49. E. During nutrition counseling, it is important for the dental hygienist to assess the patient’s knowledge of information provided and to include the patient in diet planning and setting goals.
B. Telling the patient what diet to follow is an example of the direct approach counseling technique and this fosters client dependence. The client is not involved in the decision making in this type of counseling approach. The likelihood of success is limited because the client is not fully committed to the suggested changes.

50. A. Frequent dietary intake of monosaccharides and disaccharides influences supragingival biofilm or plaque formation.
B. Fiber-rich foods are encouraged to reduce the formation of supragingival biofilm or plaque.
C. Protein-rich foods promote a more alkaline pH in the oral cavity. Protein-rich foods do not contribute to the formation of supragingival biofilm or plaque.
D. Fat content of foods promotes a more alkaline pH in the oral cavity. Foods with a higher fat content do not contribute to the formation of supragingival biofilm or plaque.
