Blue: Darby's Comprehensive Review of Dental Hygiene, 9th Edition

Chapter 14: Periodontics

Chapter Review - Answers and Rationales 


1. A. Both statements are true, but the second statement is false. Gingival recession requires evaluation by a dentist or periodontist for possible need for surgical correction when inadequate attached gingiva or a mucogingival problem exists. Periodontal plastic surgery or mucogingival surgery would be required for this condition; a gingivectomy is indicated for removal or excision of excess tissue, for example, medication-induced gingival overgrowth.
B, C, and D. Both statements are TRUE.

2. D. An interdental brush is an effective plaque-removal device for interproximal deposits. This device is particularly useful where recession and larger embrasure spaces exist.
A. Dental floss is an effective plaque-removal device for interproximal deposits; however, floss would not be as effective as an interdental brush with recession and larger embrasure spaces.
B. Dental tape is an effective plaque-removal device for interproximal deposits; however, tape would not be as effective as an interdental brush with recession and larger embrasure spaces.
C. Oral irrigation can be an effective adjunct to remove loosely adherent plaque; however, it is not effective for complete plaque biofilm removal; mechanical devices are needed.

3. C. This is the goal of the grading component of the classification system, not of staging.
A. 	Goal of staging.
B.  Goal of staging.
D. 	Goal of staging.

4. C. The statement is correct, but the reason is not correct. An oxygenating mouthrinse is effective for reducing halitosis; however, the most effective antimicrobial rinse for reducing bacterial plaque biofilm and gingivitis is chlorhexidine.
A. The reason is NOT correct.
B. The reason is NOT correct.
D. The statement is correct, but the reason is NOT correct.
E. The statement is correct.

5. C. Nonsurgical periodontal therapy (NSPT) would be recommended for this case as an initial therapy because of the presence of chronic periodontitis, probing depths, inflammation, and deposits.
A. Regenerative periodontal surgery would not be indicated because 4- to 6-mm pockets with inflammation and without complications such as furcation involvement or mobility can be successfully treated with nonsurgical therapy. Reevaluation for the need for regenerative surgery would occur 4 to 6 weeks after NSPT.
B. Gingival curettage has no therapeutic advantage over periodontal debridement and root planing performed as a portion of nonsurgical periodontal therapy.
D. Oral prophylaxis is indicated for gingival health and treatment of gingivitis rather than for treatment of periodontitis.
E. Periodontal maintenance therapy is indicated to maintain health after successful nonsurgical or surgical periodontal therapy to protect the wound and enhance client comfort.

6. C. Gingival condition would be the best indicator of treatment success or failure at the 1-month reevaluation appointment following initial periodontal therapy. This is because resolution of inflammation indicates adequate debridement and oral hygiene on the basis of this client’s host response, and continued inflammation indicates the need for additional treatment.
A. The amount and distribution of plaque are less indicative of treatment success than gingival condition because plaque forms every 12 to 24 hours and may or may not contain periodontal pathogens sufficient to cause disease; gingival inflammation indicates the presence of active disease, and lack of inflammation indicates health.
B. Probing depths are less indicative of treatment success than gingival condition. This is because errors in initial or follow-up probing can affect comparisons, and a 4-mm bleeding pocket may be converted to a nonbleeding site indicating absence of inflammation; gingival inflammation indicates the presence of active disease, and lack of inflammation indicates health.
D. Reformed calculus deposits indicate that a review of oral hygiene self-care for that area and re-debridement are needed; however, this is not the best indicator of treatment outcomes. Gingival inflammation indicates the presence of active disease, and lack of inflammation indicates health.

7. A. The alveolar crest is the interproximal extension of the alveolar bone proper that outlines the tooth socket. The crest is seen as fuzzy or having reduced density in early alveolar bone loss.
B. Faint cup-shaped areas in interproximal bone may indicate a crater, which is not an early sign of bone loss; craters in alveolar bone generally occur with moderate or advanced bone loss.
C. Vertical or angular defects in alveolar bone indicate a moderate or advanced alveolar bone loss.
D. Furcation involvements indicate advanced or severe alveolar bone loss.

8. C. Neutrophils or polymorphonuclear leukocytes, are the first inflammatory cells to respond to injury or irritation, or to virulent bacteria present in plaque biofilm.
A. B-lymphocytes and plasma cells predominate (75%) in the established lesion of chronic gingivitis.
B. Plasma cells are characteristic of chronic plaque-induced gingivitis and chronic periodontitis.
D. T-lymphocytes predominate in the early lesion (4 to 7 days after biofilm formation and bacterial virulence).
E. Macrophages are present in all stages, but they are less predominant initially than neutrophils.

9. D. Swelling of the gingival margin without bone loss results in a pseudopocket; true periodontal pockets are characterized by apical migration of the junctional epithelium, destruction of the connective tissue attachment, and bone loss.
A. Apical migration of the junctional epithelium occurs in response to bacterial plaque biofilm and resultant periodontal tissue degeneration in a true periodontal pocket.
B. Apical migration of the gingival margin constitutes gingival recession, not a true periodontal pocket.
C. Resorption of alveolar bone or bone loss is characteristic of true periodontal pockets found in periodontitis versus a pseudopocket that is caused by the enlargement of the gingiva coronally.

10. D. Periodontal probing is the most accurate method of assessing the severity of periodontitis because the periodontal probe is the only instrument that can assess the level of connective tissue attachment to the tooth in relation to the cemento-enamel junction (CEJ) on all surfaces of the tooth; extent of loss of attachment or clinical attachment loss is the key measure of disease severity.
A. A radiograph only indicates level of alveolar bone; it does not illustrate the level of the soft tissues; buccal and lingual bone height also is difficult to diagnose because of the presence of the root surfaces on a two-dimensional radiograph.
B. Microbial testing of microbes in plaque biofilm can be useful adjunctive information, especially if antibiotics are indicated or recurrent disease is detected.
C. Pathologic tooth mobility and furcation involvement most commonly appear in advanced or severe periodontitis; these measures cannot be used to detect earlier stages of attachment loss.
E. Bleeding on probing may not be readily detected in a chronic, fibrotic situation or in smokers; it also can occur in normal sulcus depths when gingival inflammation exists without any loss of connective tissue attachment or bone; repeated probing of a given site or excessive pressure also can cause bleeding.

11. D. Given the pathway of inflammation through the periodontal structures, the cortical plate of the interdental septum is the first bony area to be affected by periodontitis.
A. The facial and lingual aspects of supporting bone are not the first areas to be involved in bone resorption caused by periodontitis; most commonly interdental areas are affected first.
B. The cribriform plate is not the first bony area to be affected by periodontitis, although the cribriform plate is called the lamina dura on a radiograph.
C. Cancellous bone is not the first bony area to be affected by periodontitis; it is part of the supporting bone.
E. The bone surrounding the apical area of the tooth is the last area to be affected by periodontitis because the disease migrates apically.

12. C. Aerobic and facultative bacteria predominate in supragingival plaque associated with gingivitis.
A. Chromogenic bacteria, sometimes present in supragingival plaque biofilm do not predominate; they influence the color of bacterial plaque biofilm when present.
B. Subgingival plaque consists primarily of gram-negative anaerobic bacteria.
D. Gram-positive Streptococcus species predominate in health and are associated with dental caries.

13. E. Osteoclasts are primarily responsible for resorption of bone and cementum; cementoblasts are present but are few in number.
A. Cementoblasts are responsible for the formation of cementum, not its resorption.
B. Fibroblasts are responsible for the formation of connective tissue, for example, that found in the gingiva and the periodontal ligament.
C. Osteoblasts are responsible for the formation of alveolar bone, not its resorption.
D. Cementoclasts are present but are few in number; osteoclasts are the primary cells responsible for resorption.

14. A. Vasodilation that occurs within the connective tissue of the gingiva, or the lamina propria, as a result of inflammation can be clinically exhibited as redness or erythema.
B. Ulceration of the gingival lining provides a pathway for bacterial irritants to enter gingival tissue and for blood from the vessels within the tissue to exit into the sulcus, or pocket.
C. Extracellular fluid accumulation and inflammatory cellular infiltrate result in swelling, or edema, associated with inflammation.
D. Collagenase is produced by anaerobic bacteria in plaque biofilm (e.g., Porphyromonas gingivalis); it destroys connective tissue (breaking down collagen) from hyperinflammation and increased proinflammatory mediators.
E. Fibroblasts are altered when bacterial plaque byproducts coat the cell walls and tissue destruction occurs as a result of inflammation within connective tissue. Altered fibroblasts fail to regenerate tissue as part of the gingiva’s normal or healing regenerative processes in health and disease and after treatment.

15. A. Both the statement and the reason are correct and related. This is because both tooth mobility and fremitus, terms that refer to movement of the tooth within the socket, can signs of occlusal trauma. Mobility refers to movement when buccal–lingual lateral pressure or vertical pressure is applied to a single tooth that is not occluded, whereas fremitus refers to movement when teeth are occluded and moved in protrusive and lateral directions. Both are caused by excessive trauma causing destruction of ligament fibers, appearing as a widened space radiographically and lateral bone resorption. These clinical findings are not related to the apical migration of bone in occlusal trauma; the apical migration of bone and connective tissue, or attachment loss, is a hallmark of periodontitis.
B, C, D, and E. The statement and the reason are related.

16. D. The lamina dura and crestal bone and a thin periodontal ligament space will most likely appear normal in gingivitis. The periodontium appears normal on a radiograph in plaque-induced gingivitis because changes within the periodontium in cases of gingivitis most commonly are confined to the soft tissue, and soft-tissue changes are not visible radiographically.
B. Slight changes in the lamina dura most likely would be associated with occlusal trauma or early periodontitis.
C. Condensing osteitis is most commonly associated with occlusal trauma.
E. Fuzziness indicating changes in the density of the crestal bone most likely would be associated with occlusal trauma or early periodontitis.

17. C. and D. both are goals of grading.
A. Goal of staging.
B. Goal of staging.

18. A and D. The crevicular and junctional epithelium are comprised of nonkeratinized squamous cell epithelium.
B. Epithelial tissues of the attached gingiva are keratinized.
C. The epithelium lining the gingiva exposed to the oral cavity, including the interdental papilla, marginal gingiva, and palatal mucosa is also keratinized.
E. The epithelium lining the gingiva exposed to the oral cavity, including the interdental papilla, marginal gingiva, and palatal mucosa is also keratinized.

19. C. Prevotella intermedia is a gram-negative anaerobe associated with necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis and periodontitis, as well as hormonal-associated gingivitis.
A. Actinomyces viscosus are facultative bacteria most commonly associated with gingivitis.
B. Porphyromonas gingivalis are a tissue-invading, collagen- and bone-destroying anaerobic bacteria; another example is Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans.
D. Treponema palladium is spirochetes associated with syphilis, not with periodontitis. Treponema denticola are spirochetes associated with periodontitis.
E. Capnocytophaga ochracea is associated with gingival health but can be associated with periodontal abscesses in immunocompromised clients.

20. C and E. Certain calcium channel blockers, as well as some anticonvulsants and immunosuppressants, can cause fibrotic gingival enlargement because of the stimulation of fibrin in tissue.
A. Oral contraceptives have been associated with gingival inflammation and inflammatory gingival enlargement because of elevated hormone levels serving as bacterial nutrients and the client’s exaggerated response to bacterial plaque biofilm. Pregnant women are immunosuppressed by progesterone in their blood.
B and D. Antidepressants and antihistamines are not generally associated with gingival overgrowth.

21. C. Gingival fibers which span from the cervical area of one tooth to the adjacent tooth. Provide support so that teeth do not separate.
A. Fibers run from the cementum in the cervical region to the free gingiva.
B. Fibers run around the neck of the tooth.
D. Fibers run from the alveolar crest to the free and attached gingiva.

22. C. The sulcular epithelium is a nonkeratinized, squamous cell epithelial tissue.
A. The sulcular epithelium is nonkeratinized tissue.
B. Like all gingival and oral epithelium, the sulcular epithelium is composed of squamous cell epithelium.
D. Cuboidal epithelium lines ducts of various glands and organs. Although oral, sulcular, and junctional epithelium have a cuboid cell layer at the base, they are not classified as simple cuboidal epithelium.
E. Parakeratinized epithelium has some degree of keratinization; the sulcular and junctional epithelium is nonkeratinized.

23. D. Necrotizing stomatitis is characterized by gray, sloughing tissue exposed bone, pain,  and spontaneous bleeding. The connective tissue destruction is so rapid that the gingiva is destroyed before apical migration of the bone, causing the bone to be exposed.
          	A. Pericoronitis is characterized by inflamed and enlarged tissue, most commonly around 	the crowns of partially erupted teeth (e.g., third molars).
	B. A periodontal abscess is a localized, purulent infection within the tissues adjacent to 	the periodontal pocket that may lead to the destruction of adjacent bone.
	C. Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (NUG) is characterized by gray, sloughing tissue, 	pain, and spontaneous bleeding, but not bone loss is present.

24. A, B, and E. Overzealous or improper toothbrushing, irritants produced by bacterial plaque biofilm, and periodontal disease can all cause of gingival recession.
C. Tissue response to medication may cause enlargement, fibrosis, or bleeding. Medications do not cause gingival recession.
D. Dental caries generally does not cause recession as it most commonly occurs in the occlusal or proximal areas of tooth contact; caries at the gingival margin may be filled with bacterial plaque biofilm, in which case the bacteria could contribute to recession.

25. D. Frequent fermentable carbohydrates in the diet increase the risk for dental caries, not periodontal disease. 
A. Studies in twins have shown that genetic factors contribute significantly to the risk of chronic periodontitis.
B. Inflammatory periodontal diseases are a host response to the irritants and toxins produced by plaque biofilm; therefore, immunocompromised status is a risk factor for periodontal disease.
C. Hormonal changes can increase the risk for hormone-associated gingivitis associated with puberty and pregnancy.
E. Poor oral hygiene increases the risk for periodontal disease and its progression because bacterial pathogens found in some plaque biofilm are etiologic factors in periodontal disease.

26. B. Gingivectomy, gingivoplasty, or both are indicated to remove or recontour areas of enlarged, fibrotic tissues that are abnormal or unacceptable to the client, but the level of the epithelial attachment does not have to be repositioned.
A. This edematous 5-mm pseudopocket area would most likely respond to thorough scaling and periodontal débridement and daily plaque biofilm removal because of the likelihood of tissue shrinkage and formation of a longer junctional epithelium. No surgical procedure is warranted.
C. Infrabony pockets respond well to periodontal regenerative surgery; surgery is indicated for periodontal pocket reduction in areas such as this 6-mm pocket because the area cannot be maintained with plaque control and nonsurgical periodontal therapy. Periodontal reconstructive surgery includes alveolar bone recontouring, bone grafts to improve contour or defects, or both.
D. A gingival graft is indicated in areas of little or no attached tissue or in cases in which the base of the pocket extends into the alveolar mucosa.
E. The need for a surgical procedure versus nonsurgical intervention for a periodontal abscess would depend on its severity; the type of surgery would depend on its cause and morphology.

27. A. Periodontal plastic and reconstructive surgery or mucogingival surgery would be indicated because of the need to restore keratinized, attached gingiva and cover the exposed root surfaces.
B. Gingivectomy, gingivoplasty, or both are indicated to remove or recontour areas of hyperplastic or fibrotic tissues that are abnormal or unacceptable to the client, but the level of the epithelial attachment does not have to be repositioned.
C. Osseous surgery includes alveolar bone recontouring, bone grafts to improve contour or defects, or both.
D. Gingivectomy removes excess gingival tissue that may interfere with the daily removal of bacterial plaque biofilm.
E. Infrabony pockets respond well to periodontal regenerative surgery, which promotes formation of new connective tissue, periodontal ligament, and alveolar bone. It is indicated for periodontal pocket reduction because the area cannot be maintained with plaque biofilm control and nonsurgical periodontal therapy.

28. A. Lipopolysaccharides (LPSs) are endotoxins produced by plaque biofilm bacteria; they irritate the tissues and evoke a host response.
B. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are enzymes produced by inflammatory cells in host response to insult or injury; cytokines stimulate the release of MMPs that go on to destroy bone in periodontitis.
C. Cytokines, including interleukins, are proteins produced by fibroblasts and inflammatory cells that are stimulated by LPSs) and participate in pathologic changes in the periodontium.
D. Interleukins are cytokines, proteins produced by fibroblasts and inflammatory cells that are stimulated by LPSs and participate in pathologic changes in the periodontium.
E. Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is produced in response to bacterial plaque endotoxins and enzymes; it is a metabolite of arachidonic acid associated with inflammation and bone loss because it induces production of MMP and bone resorption.

29. A, B, and D. Thorough removal of bacterial irritants is necessary in periodontal therapy to arrest inflammation and allow tissues to heal. Splinting or otherwise immobilizing mobile teeth fosters stabilization and healing following periodontal surgery. Regeneration of new tissues and parts in the formation of a new attachment following periodontal surgery, which requires an adequate number of formative cells, including fibroblasts, cementoblasts, and osteoblasts, is essential.
C. Shrinkage of the gingival margin may occur when inflammation is resolved following periodontal therapy, but it is not involved in formation of the new attachment.
E. The epithelium regenerates at a faster rate than do other periodontal tissues; if this occurs in an apical direction, it will preclude the attachment of connective tissue and bone to the tooth, thus preventing new attachment following periodontal surgery.

30. D. Controlled (sustained-release) drug delivery is site specific, and application is limited to a specified number of sites, depending on the drug selected; therefore, systemic antibiotics are used for generalized conditions warranting antibiotic therapy.
A. Because sustained-release drugs are placed by a professional dental hygienist or a dentist in a given site and remain in place releasing the active ingredient throughout the regimen required, client adherence is better compared with systemic antibiotics.
B. Because sustained-release drugs are placed in a specific site by a dental hygienist or a dentist and remain in place releasing the active ingredient throughout the regimen required, they are site specific, whereas systemic antibiotics are processed by the body and released into all subgingival areas via the bloodstream.
C. Because sustained-release drugs are placed by a dental hygienist or a dentist in a given site and remain in place releasing the active ingredient throughout the regimen required, the concentration in that site is higher than when systemic antibiotics are processed by the body and released into all the subgingival areas via the bloodstream.

31. A. Continuing attachment loss of 2 mm is unlikely in slowly progressive, chronic  
periodontitis; also, it would appear radiographically as a change in bone density, 
morphology, or height.
	B. Errors in probing technique at either the initial reading or the reevaluation could 	account for the increased probing depth; rechecking the reevaluation reading would be 	indicated to determine accuracy.
	C. Subgingival calculus deposits, especially if moderate or heavy, can prevent access to 	the base of a periodontal pocket; therefore, the increase in probing depth could have 	occurred because of debridement after the initial reading during NSPT.
	D. The distal of the molars is a difficult area to access for assessment and 	instrumentation, especially on the maxilla; in addition, deeper pockets are difficult to 	access. Poor visibility can be created by hemorrhage, inadequate illumination, inadequate 	use of air, client or operator positioning, or other operator errors during probing.
	E. Increased inflammation of the gingival tissues could explain an increase in probing 	depth at reevaluation, especially in difficult to access areas for self-care, like the distal 	surface of #15.

32. C and D. Plastic resin and titanium are the most commonly used material for maintenance of dental implants because they cause less surface alteration in the titanium implant surface.
A. Stainless steel, or any metal, is contraindicated for maintaining dental implants due to the potential for surface roughness or gouges.
B. Carbon steel, or any metal, is contraindicated for maintaining dental implants due to the potential for surface roughness or gouges.

33. E. An implant becomes mobile when excessive occlusal stress or bone loss has occurred; therefore, mobility can be a sign of failure; implants have no periodontal ligament and are ankylosed in bone allowing no mobility.
A. Peri-implant inflammation occurs as a result of bacterial plaque biofilm irritation similar to inflammation around any other tooth; it requires self-care, professional removal, or both but does not indicate implant failure.
B. Bleeding on provocation such as toothbrushing, flossing, or gentle probing occurs as a result of bacterial plaque irritation similar to inflammation around any other tooth; it requires self-care, professional removal, or both but does not indicate implant failure.
C. Slight alveolar bone loss (0.5 to 1 mm) normally occurs during the first 1 to 2 years following implant placement; bone loss also may occur as a result of peri-implantitis requiring nonsurgical or surgical periodontal therapy; depending on severity, it does not necessarily indicate implant failure.
D. Prosthetic crowns occasionally are loosened from the implant, but this does not indicate implant failure.

34. B. Clinical attachment loss is measured from the cemento-enamel junction (CEJ) to the epithelial attachment at the base of the pocket because a normal connective tissue attachment approximates the CEJ, or is just subgingival to it, and the CEJ is a static reference point on the tooth.
A. Probing depth is measured from the margin of the gingiva to the epithelial attachment. It is affected by enlargement or recession of the gingival margin as it is not a static reference point like the CEJ.
C. Probing from the margin of the gingiva to the CEJ, or vice versa, can be used to assess extent of gingival recession or enlargement.
D. A clinician never probes to margin of the alveolar bone as the bone is protected by the junctional epithelium and the connective tissue attachment.

35. B. The width of the attached gingiva varies from 1.8 to 4.5 mm and is the narrowest in the premolar regions because of the frenal attachments found on the gingiva in this area.
A. The attached gingiva is generally widest in the facial anterior areas and wider on the maxilla than the mandible.
C. The maxillary premolars are narrower than the maxillary molars.
D. The width is not measure on the palate as it cannot be clinically distinguished from the palatal mucosa.

36. D. The lamina propria is located in the gingival mucosa beneath the epithelium. It is the connective tissue of the gingiva.
A. The lamina dura is located in the gingival mucosa not the periodontal ligament which is found between the alveolar bone and cementum.
B. The lamina dura is located in the gingival mucosa not the alveolar bone.
C. The lamina dura is located in the gingival mucosa not at the cemento-enamel junction on the tooth.

37. C. and D. Regeneration—growth and differentiation of new cells and intercellular substances to form or re-form tissues or parts of the same type as the precursor is the primary means of healing following nonsurgical periodontal therapy, creating a longer junctional epithelium. Shrinkage of the gingival margin may also contribute to pocket reduction, especially when edematous tissue is present.
A. Reattachment cannot occur with diseased tissue that is targeted by nonsurgical periodontal therapy. It could occur following loosening of a tooth by an injury because the attachment tissues would be healthy enough to regenerate despite the trauma.
B. A new attachment requires removal of all diseased tissue and bacterial irritants. Tissue is not intentionally removed in nonsurgical periodontal therapy as it is in periodontal surgery. Thus, new attachment is more likely after surgery.

38. A. Periodontal pockets – does not elicit occlusal trauma
B. 	Can elicit occlusal trauma
C.  Can elicit occlusal trauma
D.  Can elicit occlusal trauma

39. D. Margins placed within the supracrestal connective tissue attachment increase the    
risk of inflammation and loss of periodontal supporting structures.
A. 	Does not elicit these changes.
B. 	Does not elicit these changes.
C. 	Does not elicit these changes.

40. B. The first step when determining the patient’s stage is to assess the interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of greatest loss.
A. 	This determination is made after assessing the patient’s clinical attachment loss.
C. 	This determination is made during grading, not staging.
D. 	This determination is made during grading, not staging.

41.	D. The first statement is FALSE. Gingival recession can occur both during and after orthodontic therapy. The second statement is TRUE. 
a. 	The first statement is FALSE and the second statement is TRUE.
b. 	The first statement is FALSE and the second statement is TRUE.
c. 	The first statement if FALSE; the second statement is FALSE

42. B. Supra-gingival placed crown margins decrease the risk of plaque retention. 
A. 	Increase the risk of plaque retention.
C. 	Increase the risk of plaque retention.
D.	Increase the risk of plaque retention.

43. B. Trifurcations of the maxillary molars. Anatomic structure of the furcation limits the effectiveness and efficiency of calculus removal.
	A. Considerably easy access area.
	C. Access can be challenging, but with the proper instrument selection, scaling and root planing can be effective.
	D. Presence of mesial root concavity needs to be taken into consideration when scaling this area. 

44. D. These first appear around day 7 to 14 and increase in number as the plaque biofilm ages.
	A. Typically found in young (day 1-2) plaque biofilm
	B. Typically found in day 2-4 plaque biofilm
	C. Typically found in day 7-14 plaque biofilm

45. A. B. C. and D. All are signs and symptoms of an endo-periodontal lesion. 

Case Review- Answer and Rationales

CASE A.

46. C. The 2017 American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association guidelines state that “Stage 1” is Systolic between 130-139 or diastolic between 80-90.
A. “Normal” is less than 120/80 mm Hg.
B. “Elevated” is between 120-129 and diastolic less than 80.
D. “Stage 2” is Systolic at least 140 or diastolic at least 90 mm Hg	.

47. C. A patient with severe systemic disease. Examples include substantive functional limitations: one or more moderate to severe diseases: poorly controlled diabetes or hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, morbid obesity (BMI > 40), active hepatitis, alcohol dependence or abuse, or implanted pacemaker.
A. A normal healthy patient. Examples include a healthy, non-smoking, no or minimal alcohol use.
B. A patient with mild systemic disease. Examples include mild diseases only without substantive functional limitations: current smoker, social alcohol drinker, pregnancy, well-controlled diabetes or hypertension, mild lung disease.
D. A patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life. Examples include: recent (less than 3 months) MI, CVA, TIA or CAD/stents.

48. A. The patient’s uncontrolled hypertension and diabetes warrant this selection.
B. The patient’s uncontrolled diabetes is an issue, but her weight is not a consideration.
C. The patient does not report any functional limitations with her osteoarthritis and the number of missing teeth is not a consideration.
D. The number of missing teeth is not a consideration, but the uncontrolled hypertension is.

49. D. The patient reports having difficulty eating and teeth #2 and #20 are hyper-erupted. One or more complexity factors such as these sift the stage to a higher level. 
A. The patient’s interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of the greatest loss is more than this stage.
B. The patient’s interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of the greatest loss is more than this stage.
C. The patient’s interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of greatest loss, number of teeth lost to periodontitis, probing depths >6mm, vertical bone loss, and furcation involvement all fall into Stage III. However, because the patient reports difficulty eating and has drifting of #2 and #20, the stage shifts to the higher level. 

50. C. The patient’s uncontrolled diabetes status increases her grade level from Grade B to Grade C. 
A. Patient does not meet grade criteria.
B. Patient does not meet grade criteria. 
D. Answer is not applicable to the case.

51. C. Elevated (> 7.0%) HbA1c level. The patient’s last known HbA1c level was greater than 7.0%.
A. The patient is a non-smoker.
B. The patient does not have a history of smoking.
D. The patient’s plaque control is not ideal, but not the main modifying risk factor.

52. A. Teeth #31 and #13 have been extracted, leaving no opposing teeth for #2 and #20.
B. No radiographic evidence of periapical lesions.
C. While #2 and #20 may have residual calculus, this would not be the reason for the teeth to 
     become hyper-erupted.
D. While #2 and #20 may have restorative needs, this would not be the reason for the teeth to 
     become hyper-erupted.

53. C. Distinct radiographic evidence of vertical bone loss on the distal surface.
A. Radiographs show horizontal bone loss.
B. Radiographs show horizontal bone loss.
D. Radiographs show horizontal bone loss.

CASE B.

54. A. Normal. The 2017 American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association guidelines state that “Normal” is less than 120/80 mm Hg.
B. “Elevated” is between 120-129 and diastolic less than 80.
C. “Stage 1” is Systolic between 130-139 or diastolic between 80-90.
D. “Stage 2” is Systolic at least 140 or diastolic at least 90 mm Hg.	

55. B. A patient with mild systemic disease. Examples include mild diseases only without substantive functional limitations: current smoker, social alcohol drinker, pregnancy, well-controlled diabetes or hypertension, mild lung disease.
A. A normal healthy patient. Examples include a healthy, non-smoking, no or minimal alcohol use.
C. A patient with severe systemic disease. Examples include substantive functional limitations: one or more moderate to severe diseases: poorly controlled diabetes or hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, morbid obesity (BMI > 40), active hepatitis, alcohol dependence or abuse, or implanted pacemaker.
D. A patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life. Examples include: recent (less than 3 months) MI, CVA, TIA or CAD/stents.

56. A. The patient’s hypertension is controlled and he monitors it regularly at home.
B. The patient’s uncontrolled hypertension. This is not an issue since blood pressure falls within the normal limits.
C. The patient’s history of pneumonia. Not applicable.
D. The patient’s history of smoking. Not applicable.

57. C. The patient’s interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of greatest loss meets this category. The number of probing depths >6mm also fulfill this stage determination. Using extent and distribution descriptor, the patient would be diagnosed with localized Stage III.
A. The patient’s interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of the greatest loss is more than this stage.
B. The patient’s interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of the greatest loss is more than this stage.
D. The patient does not have the extent of periodontal destruction required for this stage.

58. A. The patient has <0.25 (% bone loss/age) and has no grade modifiers to increase the category to the next grade.
B. No evidence to support a change to this grade. 
C. No evidence to support a change to this grade.
D. Undetermined. Answer is not applicable to the case.

59. D. Tooth #28. Periapical radiographs show overhang amalgam on the distal of #28. 
A. Tooth #4. No iatrogenic factor present
B. Tooth #12. No iatrogenic factor present
C. Tooth #18. No iatrogenic factor present

60. C. Radiographs show generalized horizontal bone loss.
A. Horizontal bone loss is the primary pattern.
B. Horizontal bone loss is the primary pattern.
D. Horizontal bone loss is the primary pattern.

CASE C.

61. D. The 2017 American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association guidelines state that “Stage 2” is Systolic at least 140 or diastolic at least 90 mm Hg.	
A. “Normal” is less than 120/80 mm Hg.
B. “Elevated” is between 120-129 and diastolic less than 80.
C. “Stage 1” is systolic between 130-139 or diastolic between 80-90.

62. C. A patient with severe systemic disease. Examples include substantive functional limitations: one or more moderate to severe diseases: poorly controlled diabetes or hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, morbid obesity (BMI > 40), active hepatitis, alcohol dependence or abuse, or implanted pacemaker.
A. A normal healthy patient. Examples include a healthy, non-smoking, no or minimal alcohol use.
B. A patient with mild systemic disease. Examples include mild diseases only without substantive functional limitations: current smoker, social alcohol drinker, pregnancy, well-controlled diabetes or hypertension, mild lung disease.
D. A patient with severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to life. Examples include: recent (less than 3 months) MI, CVA, TIA or CAD/stents.

63. D. The patient’s interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of greatest loss meets this category. More than 5 teeth have been lost due to periodontitis. In addition, the patient has masticatory dysfunction, drifting of teeth, and less than 10 opposing pairs of teeth.
A. The patient’s interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of the greatest loss is more than this stage.
B. The patient’s interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of the greatest loss is more than this stage.
C. The patient’s interdental clinical attachment loss at the site of greatest loss meets this category. However, the patient has probing depths > 6mm, vertical bone loss, and furcation involvement of Class II which shift the stage to the higher level.

64. B. The patient has greater than 15-33% radiographic bone loss.
A. The patient has less than 20 opposing pairs of teeth.
C. The patient has drifting teeth.
D. The patient has greater than 5 teeth lost due to periodontitis.

65. C. Severe bone loss and grade modifier of smoking >10 cigarettes/day warrant this grade classification.
A. Patient does not meet grade criteria.
B. Patient does not meet grade criteria. 
D. Answer is not applicable to the case.















