Blue: Darby's Comprehensive Review of Dental Hygiene, 9th Edition
Chapter 09: Microbiology and Immunology
Chapter Review - Answers and Rationales 
What cellular structure is involved in protein synthesis?
Golgi complex
Ribosome
Mitochondrion
Nucleus
The type of microscopic technique used to examine living cells.
Phase-contrast microscopy
Darkfield microscopy
Bright-field microscopy
Scanning electron microscopy
Identify the type of staining used to determine if an organism is a spore former.
Flagellar stain
Acid-fast stain
Gram staining
Schaefer-Fulton stain
What is the CORRECT morphologic name for bacteria that do appear in irregular clusters?
Staphylococci
Diplococci
Sarcinae
Pleomorphic
The type of microbial relationship in which one organism benefits at the other neither benefits or is harmed.
Symbiosis
Predation
Commensalism
Parasitism
Which immunoglobulin is the first to appear in immune response?
IgG
IgM
IgA
IgE
An infection in which the causative agent remains inactive for a time, but then becomes active to produce symptoms of the disease:
Latent
Primary
Toxemia
Nosocomial
A chancre is present during which stage of a syphilis infection?
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
Quaternary
The structure that is responsible for regulating movement of materials into and out of the cell:
Ribosome
Plastid
Cytoplasmic membrane
Vacuole
In prokaryotes, respiration occurs through what cellular structure?
Cytoplasmic membrane
Mitochondria
Ribosomes
Lysosomes
Shingles are caused by this virus:
Rubella virus
Human parvovirus B19
Varicella-zoster virus
Papillomavirus
The cardinal signs of inflammation include all of the following except one.  Which one is the exception?
a. Heat
b. Pain
c. Swelling
d. Pus formation 
The bacterial species primarily responsible for root caries is:
Streptococcus mitis
Streptococcus sanguinis
Streptococcus salivarius
Actinomyces naeslundii
The type of immunity acquired when a mother passes antibodies to her infant is called:
Natural active
Artificial active
Natural passive
Artificial passive
Herpes viruses are responsible for the formation of:
Cold sores
Warts
Chickenpox
Measles
The causative agent of syphillis is:
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Epstein-Barr virus
Treponema pallidum
Rubella virus
The primary organism in necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis is:
Streptococcus mutans
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans
Candida albicans
Prevotella intermedia
The causative agent of tuberculosis is:
Chlamydia psittaci
Treponema pallidum
Treponema tuberculosis
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
All of the following are gram-negative bacteria except one.  Which on is the exception?
Neisseria spp.
Veillonella spp.
Fusobacterium spp.
Streptococcus spp.
The bacterial species commonly responsible for smooth surface caries is:
S. sobrinus
S. salivarius
S. mitis
S. mutans
Enamel demineralization typically occurs at this pH:
a.    2.0 – 3.0
b.    4.5 – 5.5
c.    6.0 – 6.7
d.    none of the above
During the first month of an infant’s life all of the following bacteria are typically present except one.  Which one is the exception?
a.    F. nucleatum
b.    S. salivarius
c.    S. mitis
d.    S. oralis 
Phase of bacterial growth where the number of viable cells decrease:
Lag phase
Stationary phase
Phase of decline
None of the above
The presence of bacteria in the bloodstream is termed:
a.   Toxemia
b.   Nosocomial
c.   Symptom
d.   Bacteremia 
Each of the following oral microorganisms could colonize soft tissues except one.  Which one is the exception?
a.    Streptococcus mitis
b.   Candida albicans
c.    Streptococcus mutans
d.    Streptococcus salivarius
Which of the following bacteria are MOST commonly found in supragingival plaque?
a.    Gram-negative cocci
b.    Gram-positive cocci
c.     Spriochetes
d.    Vibrios
All of the following are prerequisites for caries development except one.  Which one is the exception?
a.    Cariogenic bacteria
b.    Supply of substrate for acid production
c.     Susceptible host
d.     Portal of exit
The causative agent of apthous ulcers is:
a.    Coxsackievirus A
b.    S. mutans
c.    C. albicans
d.    None of the above
A 21-year-old woman presented for her dental cleaning.  Upon examination the dental hygienist noticed a raised, white, nonremovable plaque on the hard palate.  Which of the following fungal infections is likely present?
a.    Pseudomembranous candidiasis
b.    Erythematous candidiasis
c.    Angular cheilitis
d.    Hyperplastic candidiasis
Which type of organism uses light for energy?
a.    Hypotrophic
b.    Chemotrophic
c.     Phototrophic
d.    None of the above.
The microbial relationship that results in an interaction in which two different species live in a mutually beneficial coexistence.
a.    Synotrophism
b.    Symbiosis
c.    Commensalism
d.    Parasitism
All of the following statements are true regarding innate immunity except one.  Which on is the exception?
a.    Present at birth
b.    Does not improve with repeated exposure
c.    Not antigen specific
d.    Antigen specific
The human immunodeficiency virus is transmitted in all of the following ways except one.  Which one is the exception?
a.    Semen
b.    Blood
c.    Saliva
d.    Breast milk
Risk factors for acquiring the human immunodeficiency virus include:
a.    Unsafe sexual practices
b.    Exposure to infected blood or blood products 
c.    Intravenous drug use
d.    All of the above
The causative agent of chickenpox is:
a.    Varicella-zoster 
b.    Herpes simplex virus
c.    Papillomavirus
d.    Rubeola virus
All of the following microorganisms are transmitted via droplet transmission except one.  Which one is the exception?
a.    Corynebacterium diptheriae
b.    Streptococcus pneumonia
c.    Mycobacterium tuberculosis
d.    Hepatitis A virus
The causative agent of syphilis is:
a.    Herpes simplex virus-2
b.    Treponema pallidum
c.    Neisseria gonorrhoeae
d.    None of the above
All of the following are periodontal pathogens except one.  Which one is the exception?
a.    P. gingivalis
b.    T. forsythia
c.    S. mutans
d.    A. actinomycetecomitans
All of the following organisms are Gram-negative, facultative anaerobes except one.  Which one is the exception?
a.    P. gingivalis
b.   A. actinomycetecomitans
c.    E. corrodens
d.    None of the above
All of the following bacteria are found in tooth-associated plaque biofilms except one.  Which one is the exeeption?
a.    S. mitis
b.    S. sanguinis
c.     P. gingivalis
d.    A. viscosus
Case A (#’s 41-44)
Patient Profile: Patient is a 32-year old Caucasian female, 5’6” and weighs 168 lbs.
Chief Complaint: “I have a painful sore on the inside of my cheek and my back tooth is hurting.”
Dental History: Her last dental visit was a dental was 5 years ago for a dental cleaning.
Medical History: The patients reported that she has been diagnosed with anxiety and depression.  She currently takes Lexapro and Wellbutrin.  Her blood pressure was recorded at 130/80.
Extraoral Exam: 
No significant findings.
Intraoral Exam: 
Dental decay on #3-O
Generalized bleeding on probing
Generalized light to moderate plaque
Generalized moderate subgingival calculus
Localized moderate bone loss in the mandibular anterior and between #18 and #19
2mmX3mm round, greyish-white lesion with erythematous halo on right buccal mucosa
Supplemental Information:
Patient reports she is stressed out financially.
Patient reports flossing 1x/month.
Bleeding Index: 55%
The bacteria most likely responsible for decay on #3-O is:
a.    A. actinomycetecomitans
b.    S. mutans
c.    A. naeslundii
d.    None of the above
The 2mmx3mm round, greyish-white lesion with the erythematous halo is likely a/an:
a.    Cold sore
b.    Apthous ulcer
c.    Erythematous candidiasis
d.    Angular cheiltis
The etiology most likely responsible for the greyish-white lesion with an erythematous halo is:
a.    Coxsackievirus
b.    T. pallidum
c.    Herpes simplex virus 2
d.    None of the above   
The predominant bacteria most likely to be found in the gingival crevicular fluid of this patient is: 
a.    Gram + cocci
b.    Gram + rods
c.    Gram –  rod
d.    None of the above
Case B (#’s 45-50)
Patient Profile: Patient is a 39-year old African American male, 6’3”, 275lbs.
Chief Complaint: “My gums bleed all the time and I haven’t had my teeth cleaned in 15 years.”
Dental History:  His last dental appointment was 15 years ago.  He had his #2 extracted due to decay.
Medical History: The patient reported he has AIDS.  He also reported that he has a history of cold sores and depression.  His recent CBC panel indicated: CD4 T-lymphocyte count was 189. He currently takes Lorazepam, Retrovir, Sustiva, and Prozac.  His blood pressure was recorded at 130/85.
Extraoral Examination:
Three purplish 2mmx3mm spots on face (mid-forehead, distal to left eye, left cheek bone)
Intraoral Examination:
Class V dental decay on #8
Ulcerated and necrotic papilla with a punched out appearance
Gray pseudomembranous slough
Generalized moderate to heavy plaque
Generalized moderate to heavy calculus
White non-removable plaque on the hard palate
Supplemental Information:
Previous IV drug user.
Bleeding Index: 65%
The patient’s reported history of cold sores is MOST likely caused by:
Herpes simplex virus
Herpes zoster
Epstein-Barr virus
None of the above
The 2mmX3mm purplish spots found during the extraoral exam is likely:
a.    Koplik spots
b.    Herpetic lesions
c.     Kaposi’s sarcoma
d.    Apthous ulcers
The bacteria most likely responsible for the class V decay on #8 is:
a.    A. actinomycetecomitans
b.    S. mutans
c.    A. naeslundii
d.    None of the above
The white non-removable plaque on the palate is likely: 
a.    Cold sore
b.    Apthous ulcer
c.    Hyperplastic candidiasis
d.    Angular cheiltis
The periodontal condition that is most likely present is:
a.    Periodontal abscess
b.    Gingivitis
c.    Necrotizing ulcerative periodontitis
d.    None of the above
The medication is indicated for depression is:
a.    Wellbutrin
b.    Retrovir
c.    Sustiva
d.    Lorazepam
Rationales
B. The ribosome is directly involved in protein synthesis.
A.The golgi complex is involved in packaging and storage of cellular products.
C.The mitochondrion is involved in energy synthesis (ATP).
D.The nucleus is involved in cell division.
Phase contrast microscopy is used to examine living cells.
B.Fluorescence microscopy is used to visualize objects that fluoresce or emit light when exposed to light of a different wavelength.
C.Bright-field microscopy is used with stained smears to observe morphology of microorganisms.
D.Darkfield microscopy is used to examine unstained microoraganisms and spirochetes and hanging drop preparations.
D. Schaefer-Fulton stain is used to determine if an organism is a spore former.
A. Flagellar stain determines if organism has flagella.
B. Acid-fast stain differentiates between acid-fast and non-acid-fast bacteria.
C. Gram staining is used to determine if bacteria present is gram positive or gram negative.
Staphylococci appear in irregular clusters.
B.   Diplococci appear in pairs.
C.   Sarcinae appears as eight cells in a cubic arrangement.
D.Pleomorphic bacteria have no defined cell shape.
C.Commensalism is an interaction in which only one organism benefits and the      other neither benefits or is harmed.
A.Symbiosis is an interaction in which two different species live in a mutually beneficial coexistence.
B.Predation is an interaction that controls the population by predators feeding on another species, the prey.
D.Parasitism is an interaction in which one organism benefits at the expense of the other.
B. IgM is the first immunoglobulin to appear in immune response.
A. IgG is the principal immunoglobulin of the secondary immune response.  IgG also is the only immunoglobulin that crosses placental barriers.
C. IgA is the principal immunoglobulin in external secretions.
D. IgE plays an important role in hypersensitivity reactions.
A latent infection is an infection in which the causative agent remains inactive for a time, but them becomes active to produce symptoms of the disease.
B. A primary infection is an original infection.
C. A toxemia results when there is presence of toxin in the blood.
D. Nosocomial infection is acquired during a hospital stay.
A chancre is present during the primary stage of a syphilis infection.
Skin rashes, mucous patches on the lip, soft palate, and tongue, and swollen lymph nodes are present during the secondary stage of a syphilis infection.
A gumma is present during the tertiary stage of a syphilis infection.
D. Syphilis infections do not have quaternary stages.
The cytoplasmic membrane is responsible for regulating movement of materials in and out of the cell.
A.The ribosome is responsible for protein synthesis.
B.The plastids are sites for protein synthesis in plant cells.
D. The vacuoles are storage sites for certain amino acids, carbohydrates, and proteins.
B. In prokaryotes, respiration occurs via the mitochondria.
A.  In eukaryotes, respiration occurs via the cytoplasmic membrane.
C.The ribosome is responsible for protein synthesis.
D.The lysosome is responsible for breaking down foreign substances.
Varicella zoster virus causes Shingles.
A. Rubella virus causes German measles.
B.Human parvovirus B19 causes erythema infectiosum.
D. Papilloma virus causes warts.
Pus formation is possible in the inflammatory process. 
A., B., C. Heat, pain and swelling are all cardinal signs of inflammation.
Actinomyces naeslundii is the primary bacterium responsible for root caries.
A.Streptococcus mitis cariogenic in animals.
B.Some strains of Streptococcus sanguinis are cariogenic in animals.
C.Some strains of Streptococcus salivarius are cariogenic in animals.
Immunity acquired when a mother passes antibodies to her infant is called natural – passive.
A.Immunity acquired when a person is exposed to an antigen and the body produces antibodies is called natural – active.
B.Immunity acquired by vaccination with a killed, inactivated, or attenuated microorganism or toxoid is called artificial – active.
D.Immunity acquired by injection of immune serum is called artificial –passive.
Herpes simplex viruses are responsible for the formation of cold sores.
B.Papillomaviruses are responsible for the formation of warts.
C.Varicella zoster viruses are responsible for the formation of chickenpox.
D.Rubella viruses are responsible for the formation of measles.
T. pallidum is the causative agent in syphilis.
      A. N. gonnorrhoeae is the causative agent in gonnorhea.
      B. The causative agent of infectious mononucleosis is Epstein-Barr virus.
D. Rubella virus is the causative agent in German measles.
P. intermedia is the primary organism present in necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis.
A.S. mutans is the primary organism present in dental caries.
B. A. actinomycetemcomitans is the primary organism present in aggressive periodontitis.
C.C. albicans is the primary organism present in necrotizing ulcerative periodontitis.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis tuberculosis.
A.Chlamydia psittaci is the causative agent Psittacosis.
B.Treponema pallidum is the causative agente of syphilis.
C.Treponema tuberculosis does not exist.
D. Streptococcus spp are gram-positive.
Neisseria spp are gram-negative.
Veillonella spp are gram-negative.
Fusobacterium spp are gram-negative.
A. S. sobrinus is primarily responsible for smooth surface caries.
B.S. salivarius is usually found on the tongue.
C.S. mitis is cariogenic in animals.
D.S. mutans initiates the caries process.
 B. Enamel demineralization typically occurs at a pH of 4.5-5.5 (acidic).
A.2.0 – 3.0 demineralization starts at pH of 4.5 -5.5.
C.6.0 – 6.7 root surface caries demineralization begins.
22.  A. F. nucleatum is a gram-negative bacterial species.  Initial colonization of an infant’s mouth is with gram-positive bacteria.
B.  S. salivarius is a gram-positive initial colonizer of an infant’s mouth.
C.  S. mitis in a gram-positive early colonizer of an infant’s mouth.
D.  S. oralis is a gram-positive early colonizer of an infant’s mouth.
23.  C. During the phase of decline the number of viable cells decrease.
A.   Lag phase: period of intense metabolic activity but no increase in cell size.
B.   Log phase: cell number increases in an exponential manner.
24.D. Bacteremia is the presence of bacteria in the bloodstream.
A.  Toxemia is presence of toxins in the bloodstream.
B.   Nosocomial infections are hospital-acquired infections.
C.    Symptoms are subjective changes in the body experienced as the result of infection.
25.  C. Streptococcus mutans colonizes hard surfaces.
A.   Streptococcus mitis is an oral microorganism that colonizes soft tissue.
B.   Candida albicans is a fungal infection that can colonize soft tissue.
D.   Streptococcus salivarius is an oral microorganism that colonizes soft tissue.
26. B. Gram-positive cocci are most commonly found in supragingival plaque.
A.   Gram-negative cocci begin to appear after gram-positive cocci.
C.    Spirochetes are more prevalent in subgingival plaque.
D.    Vibrios are more prevalent in subgingival plaque.
27.  D. The portal of exit is involved in disease transmission.
A.   Cariogenic bacteria is a prerequisite for caries development.
B.    Supply of substrate is a prerequisite for caries development.
C.    A susceptible host is a prerequisite for caries development.
28. D. None of the above.  The etiology of apthous ulcers are unknown.
A.   Coxsackievirus A is the causative agent of herpangina and hand-foot-mouth disease.
B.   S. mutans is the causative agent for dental caries.
C.   C. albicans is the causative agent for oral candidiasis.
29. D. Hyperplastic candidiasis presents as a raised, white, nonremovable plaque on the hard palate, buccal mucosa, and/or dorsum of the tongue.
A.   Pseudomembranous candidiasis is a removable soft, creamy, white plaque predominantly found on the buccal and labial mucosa, tongue, hard and soft palates.
B.   Erythematous candidiasis is a smooth, flat, red lesion on the dorsum of the tongue.
C.   Angular cheilitis presents as cracking or redness around the corners of the mouth.
30.  C. Phototrophic organisms use light for energy.
A.   Hypotrophic organisms only grow within a living host cell.
B.   Chemotrophic organisms oxidize chemical compounds for energy.
31. B.  Symbiosis is an interaction is which two species live in a mutually beneficial coexistence.
A.  Synotrophism occurs when organisms are not intimately associated with each other but benefit from each other.
C.   Commensalism is an interaction in which only one organism benefits and the other neither benefits or is harmed.
D.   Parasitism is an interaction in which one organism benefits at the expense of the other. 
32. D. Adaptive immunity is antigen specific.  Exposure results in immunologic memory.
A.   Innate immunity is present at birth.
B.   Innate immunity does not improve with repeated exposure.
C.   Innate immunity is not antigen specific.  Exposure results in no immunologic memory.
33. C. The human immunodeficiency virus is not transmitted through saliva.
A.  The human immunodeficiency virus is transmitted through semen.
B.   The human immunodeficiency virus is transmitted through blood.
D.   The human immunodeficiency virus is transmitted through breast milk.
34. D. All of the above.
A.   Unsafe sexual practices are a risk factor for acquiring the human immunodeficiency virus.
B.   Exposure to infected blood or blood products are a risk factor for acquiring the human immunodeficiency virus.
C.   Intravenous drug use is a risk factor for acquiring the human immunodeficiency virus.
35. A. The varicella-zoster virus is responsible for causing chickenpox.
B.   The herpes simplex virus is responsible for causing herpes.
C.   The papillomaviruses are responsible for causing warts.
D.  The rubeola virus is responsible for causing measles.
36. D. Hepatitis A virus is transmitted via the fecal-oral route.
A.   Corynrbacterium ditheriae is transmitted via droplet transmission.
B.   Streptococcus pneumonia is transmitted via droplet transmission.
C.   Mycobacterium tuberculosis is transmitted via droplet transmission.
37. B. Treponema pallidum is the causative agent of syphilis.
A.   Herpes simplex virus is the causative agent of genital herpes.
C.   Neisseria gonorrhoeae is the causative agent of gonnorhea.
38.  C. S. mutans is a cariogenic bacteria.
A.   P. gingivalis is a periodontal pathogen.
B.   T. forsythia is a periodontal pathogen.
C.    A. actinomycetecomitans is a periodontal pathogen.
39.  A. P. gingivalis is a gram-negative obligate anaerobe.
B.   A. actinomycetecomitans is a gram-negative facultative anaerobe.
C.   E. corrodens is a gram-negative facultative anaerobe.
40. C. P. gingivalis is found in tissue-associated plaque biofilms.
A.   S. mitis is found in tooth-associated plaque biofilms.
B.   S. sanguinis is found in tooth-associated plaque biofilms.
D.   A. viscosus is found in tooth-associated plaque biofilms.
41. B. S. mutans is responsible for the initiation of the caries process.
A. A. actinomycetecomitans is the causative organism of periodontitis.
C. A. naeslundii is primarily responsible for root surface caries.
42. B. Apthous ulcers present as a round, greyish-white lesion with an erythematous halo and typically occurs on the soft tissue inside of the mouth.
A.   A cold sore typically occurs on outside of the mouth.
C.   Erythematous candidiasis presents as a smooth, flat, red lesion on the dorsum of the tongue.
D.   Angular cheilits presents as cracking or redness at the commissures of the lips.
43. D. None of the above.  The etiology of apthous ulcers is currently unknown.
A.   Coxsackievirus is responsible for hand-foot-mouth disease and herpangina.
B.   T. pallidum is the causative agent of syphilis.
C.    Herpes simplex virus is the causative agent of genital herpes.
44. C. Gram – species are more prevalent in the gingival crevicular fluid of patients with periodontal disease.
A.   Gram + cocci are more prevalent in supragingival plaque.
B.   Gram + rods are more prevalent in supragingival plaque.
45. A. Herpes simplex virus is the causative agent of cold sores.
B.   Herpes zoster is the causative agent of shingles.
C.   Epstein-Barr virus is the causative agent of mononucleosis.
46. C. Kaposi’s sarcoma present as purplish spots typically on the legs, feet or face.
A.   Koplik spots typically present as white lesions on the buccal mucosa and are associated with measles.
B.   Herpetic lesions present as vesicle filled raised lesions typically found on the lip.  
C.   Apthous ulcers present as purplish-white lesions with an erythematous halo usually found on the soft tissue inside of the mouth.
 
47. C. A. naeslundii is primarily responsible for root surface caries.
A.  A. actinomycetecomitans is the causative organism of periodontitis.
B.  S. mutans is responsible for the initiation of the caries process.
48. C. Hyperplastic candidiasis typically presents as a white non-removable plaque on the hard palate.
A.  A cold sore typically occurs on outside of the mouth.
B.  Apthous ulcers present as a round, greyish-whit lesion with an erythematous halo and typically occurs on the soft tissue inside of the mouth.
D.   Angular cheilitis presents as cracking or redness at the commissures of the lips.
49. C. Necrotizing ulcerative periodontitis presents as a necrosis of the gingival tissues with a gray pseudomembranous slough that can occur in persons infected with HIV.
A.  Periodontal abscess presents as a small red bump pushing out of the edematous gingiva.
B.   Gingivitis 
50. A. Wellbutrin is indicated for depression.
B.   Retrovir is used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS.
C.   Sustiva is used in the treatment of HIV/AIDS.
D.   Lorazepman is indicated for anxiety.
 