21. Which of the following drugs is used to treat trigeminal neuralgia?
A. Phenytoin
B. Topiramate
C. Carbamazepine
D. Lamotrigine
 22. All the drugs listed below can cause xerostomia EXCEPT one. What is the EXCEPTION?
A. Amitriptyline
B. Fluoxetine
C. Thioridazine
D. Nortriptyline
 23. Pregnant patients should not take:
A. Amoxicillin
B. Erythromycin
C. Penicillin
D. Tetracycline
 24. Which antiseizure drug is available as a chewable dose form designed for pediatric patients?
A. Carbamazepine
B. Topiramate
C. Levetiracetam
D. Gabapentin
 25. Patients taking metronidazole should avoid:
A. Mouth rinse without alcohol
B. Caffeine-free beverages
C. Mouth rinse with alcohol
D. Sugar-free beverages
 26. Which of the following foods can cause significant drug:food interactions?
A. Orange juice
B. Grapefruit juice
C. Avocados
D. Apple juice
 27. Which drug is associated with photosensitivity?
A. Amoxicillin
B. Phenytoin
C. Aspirin
D. Tetracycline
 28. Which drug is a common angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor?
A. Propranolol
B. Losartan
C. Enalapril
D. Nifedipine
 29. Aripiprazole (Abilify) is used to treat all the following EXCEPT one. What is the EXCEPTION?
A. Schizophrenia
B. Treatment-resistant depression
C. Anxiety
D. Bipolar disorder
 30. Which drug is a common HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor?
A. Ezetimibe
B. Lovastatin
C. Alirocumab
D. Colestipol
 31. Which drug is a common calcium channel blocker?
A. Enalapril
B. Nifedipine
C. Candesartan
D. Amiloride
 32. The combination of clarithromycin/amoxicillin or metronidazole/esomeprazole is used to treat:
A. GERD
B. Treatment-resistant strep throat
C. Peptic ulcer disease
D. Treatment-resistant pneumonia
 33. Which drug is a second-generation antipsychotic drug?
A. Fluoxetine
B. Promethazine
C. Fluphenazine
D. Risperidone
 34. All the following are side effects of antipsychotic drugs EXCEPT one. What is the EXCEPTION?
A. Acute dystonic reactions
B. Sialorrhea
C. Akathisia
D. Parkinsonian symptoms
 35. Patients taking calcium channel blocking drugs are at risk for developing:
A. Xerostomia
B. Gingival hyperplasia
C. Glossitis
D. Sedation
 36. Patients taking daily aspirin therapy to minimize the risk of an additional myocardial infarction or stroke can experience:
A. Increased bleeding during scaling and planing
B. Decreased bleeding during scaling and planing
C. Xerostomia
D. Sialorrhea
 37. Which drug is a common beta-blocker drug?
A. Enalapril
B. Spironolactone
C. Metoprolol
D. Prazosin
 38. All the following drugs are used to alter blood coagulation EXCEPT one. What is the EXCEPTION?
A. Warfarin
B. Fenofibrate
C. Rivaroxaban
D. Apixaban
 39. Which drug is used as a rescue inhaler for acute asthma symptoms?
A. Albuterol
B. Salmeterol
C. Cromolyn
D. Flunisolide
 40. Which drug can be safely used in a pregnant woman?
A. Tetracycline
B. Alprazolam
C. Amoxicillin
D. Diazepam
 41. Patients taking zolpidem (Ambien) for insomnia can experience all the following EXCEPT one. What is the EXCEPTION?
A. Sleep-driving
B. Sleep-eating
C. Agitation
D. Next day sedation
 42. Which drug irreversibly binds to the proton pump, resulting in acid suppression that lasts more than 24 hours?
A. Famotidine
B. Esomeprazole
C. Sucralfate
D. Magnesium
 43. Which drug exerts its antidepressant effect by solely blocking the reuptake of serotonin?
A. Fluoxetine
B. Venlafaxine
C. Duloxetine
D. Amitriptyline
 44. Which drug blocks histamine2-receptors in the stomach?
A. Esomeprazole
B. Magnesium
C. Famotidine
D. Aluminum
 45. Which drug is used to treat opioid overdose?
A. Flumazenil
B. Epinephrine
C. Diphenhydramine
D. Naloxone
 46. Patients taking large doses of acetaminophen for pain should be warned of the risk of:
A. Sedation
B. Liver toxicity
C. Gastric bleeding
D. Ototoxicity
 47. Patients with renal impairment should avoid the following drugs EXCEPT for one. What is the EXCEPTION?
A. Ibuprofen
B. Acetaminophen
C. Naproxen
D. Meloxicam
 48. Patients using nicotine chewing gum to stop smoking should be counseled about all the following side effects EXCEPT one. What is the EXCEPTION?
A. Jaw ache
B. The ability of the gum to stick to dental work
C. Runny nose
D. Sore mouth
 49. All the following are side effects of varenicline EXCEPT one. What is the EXCEPTION?
A. Changes in mood and behavior
B. Sleep problems
C. Constipation
D. Diarrhea
 50. Which drug is used to treat dental anxiety?
A. Zolpidem
B. Alprazolam
C. Butabarbital
D. Buspirone


ANSWERS

	1.	
C. Carbamazepine, and antiseizure drug, is used to treat trigeminal neuralgia. Phenytoin (A) is an antiseizure drug. Topiramate (B), is an antiseizure drug that is used to treat seizures and migraine headaches. Lamotrigine (D) is an antiseizure drug that is used to treat seizures and bipolar disorder. 

	2.	
	B.	Fluoxetine, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, does not cause xerostomia. Amitriptyline (A), Thioridazine (C), and Nortriptyline (D) are tricyclic antidepressants and can all cause xerostomia to varying degrees.

	23.	
D. Tetracycline is contraindicated in pregnant women because the drug can cross the placenta and sit in the gingival crevicular fluid of unerupted teeth. That can lead to permanent discoloration of the teeth in the fetus. Amoxicillin (A), Erythromcyin (B), and (C) Penicillin can all be used in pregnant women.

	24.	
	A.	Carbamazepine is available as a chewable dose form for pediatric patients. Topiramate (B) is only available as tablets, capsules, and an oral solution. Levetiracetam (C) is available as tablets, capsules, and an oral solution. Gabapentin (D) is available as tablets, capsules, and an oral solution.

	25.	
C. Mouth rinses with alcohol should be avoided in patients taking metronidazole because of the increased risk for a disulfiram-like reaction. Mouth rinses without alcohol (A) are recommended for people taking metronidazole. Caffeine-free beverages (B) can be consumed by people taking metronidazole. Sugar-free beverages (D) can be consumed by people taking metronidazole.

	26.	
B. Grapefruit juice interacts with many medications and can increase the blood levels of those medications, thereby causing toxicity. Orange juice (A), Avocados (C) and Apple juice (D) do not interact with medications.

	27.	
D. Tetracycline can cause photosensitivity. Amoxicillin (A), Phenytoin (B) and Aspirin (C) do not cause photosensitivity.

	28.	
C. Enalapril is an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor. Propranolol (A) is a beta-blocker. Losartan (B) is an angiotensin receptor blocker. Nifedipine (D) is a calcium channel blocker.

	29.	
C. Anxiety is not treated with aripiprazole. Aripiprazole is an antipsychotic drug that is used to treat schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, and treatment-resistant depression. Schizophrenia (A) is an indication for aripiprazole therapy. Treatment-resistant depression (B) is an indication for aripiprazole therapy. Bipolar disorder (D) is an indication for aripiprazole therapy.

	30.	
	B.	Lovastatin is a HMG Co-A reductase inhibitor. Ezetimibe(A) is a cholesterol absorption inhibitor. Alirocumab (C) is a PCSK9 inhibitor. Colestipol (D) is a bile acid sequestrant.

	31.	
B. Nifedipine is a common calcium channel blocker. Enalapril (A) is an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor. Candesartan (C) is an angiotensin receptor blocker. Amiloride (D) is a potassium-sparing diuretic.

	32.	
	C.	Peptic ulcer disease that is caused by the bacteria helicobacter pylori is treated with this combination of medications. GERD (A) can be treated with H2-receptor blockers, proton pump inhibitors or antacids. Treatment-resistant strep throat (B) is not treated with this combination of medications. Treatment-resistant pneumonia (D) is not treated with this combination of medications.

	33.	
	D.	Risperidone is a second-generation antipsychotic drug. Fluoxetine (A) is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. Promethazine (B) is a first-generation antihistamine and first-generation antipsychotic drug. Fluphenazine (C) is a first-generation antipsychotic drug.

	34.	
B. Sialorrhea is excessive salivation which is not a side effect of antipsychotic drugs. This is a result of increased acetylcholine levels. Antipsychotic drugs block cholinergic receptors which can cause dry mouth. Acute dystonic reactions (A), Akathisia (C), and Parkinsonian-symptoms (D) are all side effects of antipsychotic drugs.

	35.	
B. Gingival hyperplasia is a side effect of calcium channel blocking drugs. Patients should be assessed for this at each visit. Xerostomia (A), Glossitis (C), and Sedation (D) are not side effects of calcium channel blocking drugs.

	36.	
A. Increased bleeding during scaling and planing because aspirin irreversibly binds to platelets. This can increase the risk for bleeding and prolong bleeding time. Decreased bleeding time (B), Xerostomia (C) and Sialorrhea (D) are not side effects of aspirin therapy.

	37.	
C. Metoprolol is a common beta-blocker. Enalapril (A) is an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor. Spironolactone (B) is a potassium-sparing diuretic. Prazosin (D) is an alpha-blocker.

	38.	
B. Fenofibrate is a fibric acid derivative that is used to treat elevated cholesterol levels. It does not affect blood clotting time, Warfarin (A) is an oral anticoagulant drug. Rivaroxaban (C) and Apixaban (D) are Factor Xa inhibitors that prevent blood coagulation. 

	39.	
A. Albuterol is a short-acting beta2-agonist that is used to treat acute asthma symptoms. Salmeterol (B) is a long-acting beta2-agonist. Long-acting beta2-agonists are not used to treat acute symptoms. They are used for long-term maintenance therapy of asthma. Cromolyn (C) is a mast-cell stabilizer that is used for the long-term maintenance of asthma. Flunisolide (D) is a steroid drug that is used for long-term asthma therapy. 

	40.	
C. Amoxicillin can be given to pregnant women. Tetracycline (A) can cause teratogenicity and should not be given to pregnant women. Alprazolam (B) and Diazepam (D) are benzodiazepines. They cannot be given to pregnant women because of the high risk for teratogenicity.

	41.	
C. Agitation is not a side effect of zolpidem. Sleep-driving (A), Sleep-eating (B) and next day sedation (D) are all side effects of zolpidem.

	42.	
B. Esomeprazole is a proton pump inhibitor that irreversibly binds to the proton pump causing acid suppression that lasts more than 24 hours. Famotidine (A) is a histamine2-receptor blocker. Sucralfate (C) is a complex of aluminum hydroxide and sulfated sucrose. It inhibits the action of pepsin and absorbs bile salts. Magnesium (D) is an antacid that neutralizes gastric pH.

	43.	
A. Fluoxetine is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor that exerts its antidepressant effect solely by blocking the reuptake of serotonin. Venlafaxine (B) and Duloxetine (C) are selective serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors that block the reuptake of both serotonin and norepinephrine. Amitriptyline (D) is a tricyclic antidepressant that affects both norepinephrine and serotonin receptors.

	44.	
C. Famotidine is a histamine2-receptor blocker that blocks histamine2-receptors in the stomach.  Esomeprazole (A) is a proton pump inhibitor that irreversibly binds to the proton pump, leading to 24-hour acid suppression. Magnesium (B) is an antacid that neutralizes gastric pH. Aluminum (D) is an antacid that neutralizes gastric pH.
