1. What is the name of the anatomical delineation that separates the attached gingival from the alveolar mucosa?
A. Gingival groove
B. Gingiva margin
C. Junctional epithelium
D. Mucogingival junction

2. Which region in the mouth is the attached gingiva the narrowest?
A. Mandibular anterior facial
B. Mandibular premolar facial
C. Maxillary anterior lingual
D. Maxillary molar facial

3. Which part of the periodontium provides a route for fluid and cells can pass from the connective tissue into the sulcus and bacteria and bacteria products to pass from the sulcus into the connective tissue?
A. Gingival sulcus
B. Junctional epithelium
C. Mucogingival junction
D. Periodontal ligament

4. What is the length of the junctional epithelium?
A. 0.14 to 0.24 mm
B. 0.25 to 1.35 mm
C. 1.36 to 1.75 mm
D. 1.76 to 2.00 mm

5. What is the predominant type of cell of the connective tissue?
A. Fibroblast
B. Macrophage
C. Lymphocyte
D. Mast

6. What is the term for an isolated area of exposed root on the facial or lingual surface of a tooth which leaves the root directly in contact with gingiva or alveolar mucosa?
A. Bifurcation
B. Dehiscence
C. Exophytic exposure
D. Fenestration

7. Which of the following is a calcium-channel blocker that has the potential to cause gingival enlargement?
A. Bisoprolol
B. Cyclosporine
C. Nifedipine
D. Phenytoin

8. What anatomical structure does the contour of the alveolar bone follow?
A. Cemento-enamel junction
B. Free gingival margin
C. Junctional epithelium
D. Mucogingival junction

9. How far apical is the alveolar crest from the cemento-enamel junction?
A. 0.5 to 1.4 mm
B. 1.5 to 2.0 mm
C. 2.1 to 2.7 mm
D. 2.8 to 3.2 mm

10. Absence of attachment loss is one feature of biofilm-induced gingivitis. What is the other clinical feature?
A. Bleeding upon probing
B. Bone loss
C. Cervical biofilm
D. Inflammation

11. Which of the following is a major lifestyle risk factor for periodontal disease?
A. Age
B. Large embrasure spaces
C. Orthodontic treatment
D. Smoking

12. Drug-induced gingival overgrowth is most often observed in which area of the mouth?
A. Anterior
B. Interproximal
C. Posterior
D. All areas

13. Nonbiofilm-induced gingivitis can be caused by a lack of which vitamin?
A. C
B. D
C. E
D. K

14. What is the most accurate measure of severity of periodontal disease?
A. Amount of bleeding upon probing
B. Amount of subgingival calculus
C. Clinical attachment level
D. Percent of plaque

15. Which periodontal disease classification is marked by crater-like depressions at the crest of the interdental papilla, interproximal necrosis and severe bleeding?
A. Biofilm-induced gingivitis
B. Drug-induced gingival enlargement
C. Necrotizing periodontal disease
D. Periodontal abscess
 16. What is the most common region for a pericoronal abscess to occur?
A. Mandibular incisor
B. Mandibular bicuspid
C. Maxillary anterior
D. Third molar
 17. Which type of cell is the earliest responder in the inflammatory defense during stage I gingivitis?
A. Dendritic cell
B. Leukocyte
C. Lymphocyte
D. Neutrophil
 18. What is the predominate type of bacteria in apical portions of subgingival-attached plaque?
A. Gram-negative filaments
B. Gram-negative rods
C. Gram-positive cocci
D. Gram-positive rods
 19. What factor does calculus play in the etiology of periodontal diseases?
A. Causative
B. Inflammatory initiating
C. Plaque retentive
D. Nonfactor
 20. Which local factor might contribute to the prognosis of the patient with periodontitis?
A. Malocclusion
B. Presence of systemic disease
C. Patient’s HbA1c level
D. High blood pressure
 21. “To treat and manage established periodontal disease and to create conditions conducive to health” defines which periodontal treatment?
A. Gingival curettage
B. Nonsurgical periodontal therapy
C. Regenerative surgery
D. Resective surgery
 22. Success rates in treating early to moderate periodontitis most often occur in which initial pocket depths?
A. 4 to 6 mm
B. 7 to 9 mm
C. 10 to 12 mm
D. Greater than 12 mm
 23. What length of time is considered appropriate for resolution of inflammation and periodontal healing after nonsurgical periodontal therapy?
A. 1 to 3 weeks
B. 4 to 6 weeks
C. 7 to 9 weeks
D. 10 to 12 weeks
 24. What is the first step when removing nonabsorbable sutures?
A. Insert the scissors under the suture and cut the suture material
B. Cleanse the wound site
C. Grasp the knotted end with cotton pliers and gently pull it away from the tissue
D. Pull the knotted end so that the material is removed from the tissue
 25. What is the first step when removing periodontal dressing?
A. Gently cleanse the area with warm water or a wet cotton tip
B. Tease the dressing away from the teeth using a curette or cotton pliers
C. Probe the sulcular area
D. Assess the tissue for healing
 26. What is the name for the adaptation of keratinized or nonkeratinized epithelium to the abutment cylinder of an implant?
A. Periodontal ligament
B. Osseo-integration
C. Perimucosal seal
D. Perio-implantitis
 27. What is the minimum success rate of implants at 5 years?
A. 85%
B. 90%
C. 95%
D. 100%
 28. What is the typical amount of alveolar bone loss around implants during the first year after placement?
A. 0 mm
B. 1 to 2 mm
C. 3 to 4 mm
D. 5 to 6 mm
 29. What is the name of the procedure which prevents the epithelium from growing downward into the bone-growing surgical site?
A. Autografts
B. Allografts
C. Gingivoplasty
D. Guided tissue regeneration
 30. Which type of fluoride has an antimicrobial mechanism of action?
A. Acidulated phosphate
B. Potassium nitrate
C. Sodium
D. Stannous


ANSWERS

	1.	D. Mucogingival junction
	A.	Located 1 to 1.5 mm apical to the gingival margin at the base of the gingival sulcus
	B.	Located at or approximately 0.5 mm coronal to the cemento-enamel junction (CEJ)
	C.	Nonkeratinized epithelium that surrounds and attaches to the tooth on one side and attaches on the other side to the gingival connective tissue
	D.	Mucogingival junction

	2.	B. Mandibular premolar facial 
	A.	Not the narrowest area of attached gingiva
	B.	Mandibular premolar facial
	C.	Is not measured on the palate because it cannot be clinically distinguished from the palatal mucosa
	D.	Typically the widest area of attached gingiva

	3.	B. Junctional epithelium 
	A.	Space formed by the tooth and the sulcular epithelium
	B.	Junctional epithelium
	C.	The anatomical delineation that separates the attached gingival from the alveolar mucosa
	D.	Connective tissue fibers that attach the tooth to the alveolar bone

	4.	B. 0.24 to 1.35mm 
	A.	Too short of length
	B.	0.25 to 1.35mm
	C.	Too long of length
	D.	Too long of length

	5.	A. Fibroblast 
	A.	Fibroblast
	B.	Immune system cell
	C.	Immune system cell
	D.	Immune system cell

	6.	D. Fenestration
	A.	Description of bone loss between two roots
	B.	Lack of alveolar cortical plate leaving the root exposed
	C.	External growth from the surface of the organ
	D.	Fenestration  






	7.	C. Nifedipine 
	A.	Beta blocker drug
	B.	Immunosuppressive drug
	C.	Nifedipine
	D.	Anti-seizure drug

	8.	A. Cementoenamel junction
	A.	Cementoenamel junction
	B.	Area lo located at or approximately 0.5 mm coronal to the cemento-enamel junction (CEJ)
	C.	Nonkeratinized epithelium that surrounds and attaches to the tooth on one side and attaches on the other side to the gingival connective tissue
	D.	Anatomical delineation that separates the attached gingival from the alveolar mucosa?

	9.	B. 1.5 to 2.0 mm
	A.	Incorrect answer – too short
	B.	1.5 to 2.0 mm
	C.	Incorrect answer – too long
	D.	Incorrect answer – too long

	10.	B. Bone loss 
	A.	Clinical sign of inflammation
	B.	Bone loss
	C.	Cause of inflammation
	D.	Immune response

	11.	D. Smoking
	A.	Not a lifestyle factor
	B.	Not a lifestyle factor
	C.	Not a lifestyle factor
	D.	Smoking

	12.	A. Anterior 
	a.	Anterior 
	b.	Interproximal 
	c.	Posterior 
	d.	All areas

	13.	A Vitamin C
	A.	C
	B.	Not associated with non-biofilm induced gingivitis 
	C.	Not associated with non-biofilm induced gingivitis
	D.	Not associated with non-biofilm induced gingivitis


	14.	C. Clinical attachment level
	A.	widely accepted as an indicator of gingival inflammation and is a poor predictor of attachment loss
	B.	Calculus plays a secondary role in the etiology of periodontal diseases by serving as a plaque-retentive factor
	C.	Clinical attachment level
	D.	Assessment of the patient’s homecare but not indicative of amount of periodontal destruction

	15.	C. Necrotizing periodontal disease 
	A.	Inflammation of the gingiva resulting from biofilm at the gingival margin
	B.	Enlargement of the gingiva
	C.	Necrotizing periodontal disease
	D.	Localized, purulent area of inflammation within periodontal tissue

	16.	D. Third molar
	A.	Incorrect answer 
	B.	Incorrect answer
	C.	Incorrect answer
	D.	Third-molar

	17.	D. Neutrophil 
	A.	Involved in the adaptive immune response
	B.	White blood cells
	C.	Type of white blood cell
	D.	Neutrophil

	18.	B. Gram negative rods 
	A.	Can be present but are not the predominant bacteria
	B.	Gram negative rods
	C.	Usually seen in supragingival plaque
	D.	Usually seen in supragingival plaque

	19.	C. Plaque-retentive 
	a.	Bacterial plaque is the causative factor
	b.	Endotoxins initiate the inflammatory process
	c.	Plaque-retentive 
	d.	Calculus is contributing factor in the pathogenesis of periodontal disease

	20.	A. Malocculsion
	A.	Malocclusion
	B.	Is not a local factor
	C.	Is not a local factor
	D.	Is not a local factor


	21.	B. Nonsurgical periodontal therapy
	A.	Gingiva a procedure to remove the ulcerated, chronically inflamed tissue lining a periodontal pocket; evidence fails to support the efficacy of this procedure
	B.	Nonsurgical periodontal therapy
	C.	Surgical procedure
	D.	Surgical procedure

	22.	A. 4-6 mm
	A.	4-6 mm
	B.	Less predictable success rate
	C.	Less predictable success rate
	D.	Less predictable success rate

	23.	B. 4-6 weeks
	A.	4 to 6 weeks is considered appropriate for the resolution of inflammation and periodontal tissue healing
	B.	4-6 weeks
	C.	4 to 6 weeks is considered appropriate for the resolution of inflammation and periodontal tissue healing
	D.	4 to 6 weeks is considered appropriate for the resolution of inflammation and periodontal tissue healing

	24.	C. Grasp the knotted end of the suture with cotton pliers and gently pull it away from the tissue
	A.	The second step of the procedure
	B.	The last step of the procedure
	C.	Grasp the knotted end with cotton pliers and gently pull it away from the tissue
	D.	The third step of the procedure

	25.	B. Tease the dressing away from the teeth using a curette or cotton pliers
	A.	The second step in removing periodontal dressing
	B.	Tease the dressing away from the teeth using a curette or cotton pliers
	C.	This is a contraindicated procedure during periodontal dressing removal
	D.	The final step in removing periodontal dressing

	26.	C. Perimucosal seal
	A.	Is not part of the implant-tissue interface
	B.	The contact established between normal and remodeled bone and the implant surface without the interposition of connective tissue
	C.	Perimucosal seal
	D.	A periodontitis-like disease process that can affect dental implants





	27.	A. 85% 
	A.	85%
	B.	Incorrect answer
	C.	Incorrect answer
	D.	Incorrect answer

	28.	B. 1-2 mm
	a.	Initial loss of 1 to 2 mm of alveolar bone during the first year after placement
	b.	1-2 mm
	c.	Initial loss of 1 to 2 mm of alveolar bone during the first year after placement
	d.	Initial loss of 1 to 2 mm of alveolar bone during the first year after placement

	29.	D. Guided tissue regeneration
	A.	Type of bone graft using bone from the same patient
	B.	Type of bone graft using bone from genetically dissimilar individuals within the same species (e.g., processed human cadaver bone that is freeze-dried or demineralized)
	C.	Reshaping of the gingiva to obtain a physiologic form similar to that characteristic of healthy tissue
	D.	Guided tissue regeneration

	30.	D. Stannous
	A.	Type of fluoride but does not have antimicrobial affect
	B.	Not a type of fluoride
	C.	Type of fluoride but does not have antimicrobial affect
	D.	Stannous
