Oral Pathology
Nancy W. Burkhart


Dental hygienists perform comprehensive extraoral and intraoral examinations, identify pathologic conditions, and communicate these findings to the dentist for diagnosis, treatment, or referral. Knowledge of oral pathology is essential for the preliminary evaluation of oral lesions. The dental hygienist differentiates between normal and abnormal findings and relates significant medical, dental, and cultural histories to clinical, radiographic, and histologic findings. Although the dental hygienist is not responsible for a definitive (final) diagnosis, skill in the use of the diagnostic process is essential to establish a dental hygiene diagnosis and contribute to collaborative practice of the dental team. Many disease states have both intraoral and extraoral early signs. The dental hygienist is an integral component in the detection, referral, and follow-up of these key health-related signs. Symptomology Science is promoted by the National Institute of Health and involves monitoring, prevention, and reduction of cancer and its recurrence through early detection. The population is aging, and those individuals who received treatments for disease states which prolonged their lives may resurface in some form at a much later time. Many of the disease states will have oral tissue implications, so it is imperative that any recurrence of disease be identified at its earliest phase.


Benign Soft Tissue Lesions
General Characteristics
A. Etiology—varies, may be unknown
B. Age and gender—predilections associated with lesion type
C. Clinical features of benign lesions
1. Lesions well-demarcated, may be encapsulated or nonencapsulated (more likely to spread)
2. Slow growing, easily palpable, with sessile or pedunculated base
3. Lack malignant features, such as fixed to underlying tissues (invasion) and metastasis (spread of tumor cells to distant body sites); induration may signify invasion in underlying tissues
D. Histologic features reflect lesion type (e.g., a lipoma is composed of fat cells vs. a fibroma composed of fibrous connective tissue)
E. Features such as slow growth and encapsulation contribute to determination of benign status
F. Benign lesions not expected to recur after complete removal with lifestyle modifications
Irritation Fibroma (Traumatic Fibroma)
A. Etiology—chronic irritation or trauma
B. Age and gender—more common in adults aged 40 to 60 years; females (2:1)
C. Location—buccal mucosa along occlusal plane; also lips, tongue, and gingiva
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.1)
1. Benign lesion of fibrous connective tissue
2. Pink color, often same coloration as adjacent normal mucosa
3. Round to oval shape
4. Most often <1 cm in size
5. Sessile or pedunculated base
6. Exophytic
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Surface covered with stratified squamous epithelium; may be hyper keratinized or ulcerated (result of secondary trauma)
2. Contains dense connective tissue with sparse blood vessels
F. Treatment—complete excision, does not recur


FIG. 8.1Fibroma with a sessile base. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Oral Squamous Papilloma
A. Etiology—due to virus; human papillomavirus (HPV) types 6 and 11
B. Age and gender—may arise at any age, but there is a 50% incidence between ages 20 and 50 years; no gender predilection; however, the chance of malignancy increases in immunocompromised patients and those that are in an elderly category
C. Location—most often seen on hard and soft palate, lips, or tongue, but can occur anywhere. Occurrence on the gingiva carries an increased risk of malignancy
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.2A)
1. Generally, a benign lesion of squamous epithelium occurring in an exophytic mass but with malignant potential1
2. Cauliflower-like appearance or cluster of finger-like projections
3. Usually white but can also be pink; color depends on surface keratinization
4. Well-delineated, exophytic, sessile base
5. Most often <0.5 cm in size but those over 10 mm have a higher increase of malignancy
E. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.2B)
1. Stratified squamous epithelium covering multiple slender cores of connective tissue
2. Variable keratinization of surface
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical excision may be used and includes the base of lesion to prevent recurrence. Cryosurgery, electrocautery, and intralesional injection of interferon are sometimes used
2. Certain locations and sizes when coupled with an age range and a compromised immune system have the potential to undergo malignant transformation and need to be followed, if not removed
3. When diagnosed in children, it may indicate sexual abuse. The HPV 6 and 11 are low-risk types but are found in condyloma acuminatum. HPV orally can be an indication of sexual contact both oral-oral or oral-genital contact. Child abuse should be considered until it can be excluded
4. Does not normally recur (Review complete section on HPV with various HPV types in this chapter).2 There are over 200 types of HP viruses, and each type may carry a determined risk
5. Because of the possibility of recurrence and malignant transformation, the lesion needs to be closely followed. Multiple biopsies when needed with a precise diagnosis are key to early detection


FIG. 8.2(A) Clinical appearance of a papilloma showing a cauliflower-like appearance and rough surface resulting from finger-like projections.
(B) Microscopic appearance of a papilloma showing finger-like projections covered by a squamous epithelial layer and supported by thin cores of fibrous tissue. From Odell E. Cawson’s Essentials of Oral Pathology and Oral Medicine. 9th ed. Elsevier; 2017.
Verruca Vulgaris (Common Wart)
A. Etiology—due to virus; HPV most common types HPV-2 and HPV-4, other viral subtypes also implicated
B. Age and gender—more common in children; but lesions have also been identified in adults; no gender predilection
C. Location—common skin lesion; lips are the most common oral site; not normally observed intraorally
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.3A and B)
1. Benign lesion of stratified squamous epithelium; rough thickened keratotic surface
2. Sessile base, color depends on location, may be lighter or darker than surrounding skin or mucosa
3. Self-innoculation (finger to lips) and spread to other epithelial areas can occur
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Well-circumscribed exophytic growth with marked hyperkeratotic stratified squamous epithelium
2. Cauliflower or finger-like extensions, with central cores of connective tissue, slope inward at lesion edges
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Various therapies include excision, cryotherapy, electrocautery, topical agents
2. May resolve spontaneously, but recurrence is common


FIG. 8.3(A and B) Verruca vulgaris on the tongue of a child, with a similar lesion on the thumb. Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Hemangioma
A. Etiology—congenital or developmental origin; may develop as response to trauma (vascular anomaly) in adults
B. Age and gender—lesions present at birth or develop shortly thereafter; more common in females (3:1)
C. Location—most common on tongue; also found on buccal and labial mucosa, and vermilion border of lips
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.4A)
1. Benign proliferation of blood vessels, deep red or bluish purple in color
2. Flat or raised, often well circumscribed
3. Lesions are compressible and color may blanch when pressure applied
E. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.4B)
1. Capillary hemangioma—numerous small dilated blood-filled capillaries lined by a single layer of endothelial cells supported by connective tissue stroma of varying density
2. Cavernous—large, dilated endothelial lined vessels and sinuses with thin walls and filled with blood, supported by connective tissue stroma of varying density
F. Treatment
a. Spontaneous remission may occur in some cases and intervention not necessary
b. Surgical excision and laser procedures may be indicated for persisting lesions
c. Sclerosing agents injected into lesions may result in resolution
G. Prognosis is good, recurrence not expected


FIG. 8.4(A) Clinical appearance of a hemangioma of the lower lip. (B) Photomicrograph of a hemangioma. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Lipoma
A. Etiology—unknown
B. Age and gender—often over 40 years; no gender predilection
C. Location—most common in buccal mucosa or mucobuccal fold
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.5A)
1. Benign tumor of mature fat cells
2. Single or lobulated, well-defined, painless mass, most often <3 cm in size
3. Sessile or pedunculated base
4. Soft to palpation
5. Surface covered with normal colored oral mucosa, yellowish color to submucosal tissues
E. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.5B)
1. Circumscribed mass of mature fat cells with collagen strands and a few blood vessels
2. Covered with layer of normal stratified squamous epithelium
3. When fibrous connective tissue forms a significant part of the lesion, the term fibrolipoma is applied
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Conservative surgical excision
2. Recurrence is rare


FIG. 8.5(A) Clinical appearance of a lipoma. (B) Photomicrograph of a lipoma showing mature fat cells. A, Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 5th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2009. B, From Regezi J, Sciubba J, Jordan RCK. Oral Pathology: Clinical Pathologic Correlations. 5th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2008.
Follow for extended description
Inflammatory Lesions
General Characteristics
A. Tissue enlargements or growths precipitated by inflammatory response
B. Account for large portion of all oral lesions
C. Benign tissue proliferations


Pyogenic Granuloma
A. Etiology—chronic irritants or trauma (i.e., plaque biofilm, calculus, poor restorative margins, altered hormone levels)
B. Age and gender—teenagers and young adults; more common in females (3:1) due to increased hormone level fluctuations such as in pregnancy and puberty
C. Location—more common on maxillary labial gingiva than mandibular gingiva; can occur on the lips, tongue, and buccal mucosa
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.6)
1. Benign mass containing numerous blood-filled small blood vessels and capillaries
2. Exuberant tissue response to chronic irritation or trauma
3. Exophytic; pedunculated, sessile, or lobulated base
4. Deep-red to purple surface which may be ulcerated; bleed easily
5. Lesions range from a few millimeters to several centimeters in size
6. In pregnancy, lesions formerly called “pregnancy tumors” or granuloma gravidarum, or epulis gravidarum
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Epithelial covering, if present, often sparse and thin, may be ulcerated
2. Rich in capillaries initially, later proliferation of connective tissue. Tissue is composed of hyperplastic granulation tissue
3. Acute and chronic inflammatory cells present, including polymorphonuclear neutrophil leukocytes (PMNs), plasma cells, and lymphocytes; however, it is not a pus-producing organism process as the name “pyogenic” would indicate
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Complete removal of irritant (most important)
2. Surgical excision for nonresponsive lesions
3. Lesions can recur if the irritant persists (e.g., calculus)
4. Lesions that occur during pregnancy may resolve spontaneously; after delivery when hormone levels return to normal


FIG. 8.6 A & BPyogenic granulomas. From Neville B, Damm DD, Allen CM, et al. Color Atlas of Oral and Maxillofacial Diseases. Elsevier Inc.; 2019.
Follow for extended description
Inflammatory Papillary Hyperplasia of the Palate (Palatal Papillomatosis)
A. Etiology—most often associated with complete maxillary or partial denture (considered a type of denture stomatitis); contributing factors include:
1. Chronic irritation to hard palate related to ill-fitting full or partial denture or orthodontic appliance
2. Poor denture hygiene and/or wearing appliance continuously (24 hours a day). This is known to contribute to candidiasis infections that will need treatment with antifungal medications.
B. Age and gender—generally adults wearing maxillary dentures, no gender predilection
C. Location—most often hard palate under denture
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.7)
1. Benign asymptomatic condition composed of closely clustered erythematous papillary projections, small 1 to 4 mm in diameter
2. Round, smooth, glistening red surface; granular appearance
3. Varying degrees of inflammation present
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Small papillary projections of stratified squamous epithelium covering central connective tissue cores
2. Infiltrated with acute and chronic inflammatory cells
F. Treatment
1. Surgical excision of hyperplastic tissue may be indicated before construction of new denture or performing a reline procedure
2. Educate patient on proper denture hygiene, and removal of denture at night to rest oral tissues and to discourage fungal infections. Appliances and toothbrushes should be clean, disinfected and replaced when appropriate. Antifungal agents are needed when candida albicans is an association
G. Prognosis—good


FIG. 8.7Papillary hyperplasia of the palate. Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Denture-Induced Inflammatory Fibrous Hyperplasia (Epulis Fissuratum, Inflammatory Hyperplasia)
A. Etiology—irritation caused by ill-fitting denture; produces tissue proliferation along a denture border or flange
B. Age and gender—denture wearers; no gender predilection
C. Location—mandibular or maxillary vestibule and alveolar ridge adjacent to denture border
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.8A and B)
1. Benign asymptomatic lesion composed of exophytic folds of hyperplastic tissue under or enfolding denture border or flange
2. Pink to red color (may be ulcerated)
3. Firm to palpation
4. Protective response of tissues to impinging denture flange
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Benign lesion composed of dense fibrous connective tissue covered by stratified squamous epithelium
2. Connective tissue composed of coarse bundles of collagen fibers
3. Same type tissue components as seen in irritation fibroma
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical removal of excess tissue often indicated to facilitate denture stability and palatal seal
2. New denture construction or relining procedures may be indicated
3. Prognosis—good


FIG. 8.8(A) Denture-induced fibrous hyperplasia (epulis fissuratum) (arrows), shown with denture in place, and (B) denture removed. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Peripheral Giant Cell Granuloma
A. Etiology—unknown but thought to be reactive response to irritation or trauma
B. Age and gender—mean age 30 to 40 years; more common in females (2:1)
C. Location—occurs exclusively on the gingiva or edentulous alveolar ridge; may arise from periodontal ligament or mucoperiosteum
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.9A)
1. Exophytic lesion 0.5 to 2.0 cm in diameter
2. Deep-red or red-blue nodular mass
3. Pedunculated or sessile base
4. Arises deeper within tissues than does pyogenic granuloma or irritation fibroma
E. Radiographic appearance
1. Superficial resorption of alveolar bone; “cupping” erosion, may occur
2. May be difficult to determine if lesion first arose peripherally (within soft tissues) or centrally (within bone)
F. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.9B)
1. Benign lesion composed of proliferating multinucleated giant cells and abundant small capillaries in a delicate connective tissue stroma, mixed with plump, ovoid, or spindle-shaped cells
2. Abundant hemorrhage and deposition of hemosiderin pigment
3. Overlying surface is frequently ulcerated
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical removal down to alveolar bone to eliminate recurrence
2. Prognosis—good


FIG. 8.9(A) Peripheral giant cell granuloma. (B) Microscopic appearance of a peripheral giant cell granuloma showing multinucleated giant cells (M), capillaries, and fibroblasts. From Neville BW. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. 4th ed. Elsevier; 2016.
Follow for extended description
Central Giant Cell Granuloma
In contrast to peripheral lesions, central lesions occur within bone.


A. Etiology—unknown but thought to be reactive response to irritation or trauma; proposed etiology includes traumatic blow to jaw or tooth extraction
B. Age and gender—children and young adults; more common in females (2:1) age 10 to 30 years
C. Location—75% in the anterior segment of the mandible; also found in the maxilla
D. Clinical features
1. Benign lesion may be aggressive or nonaggressive
2. Asymptomatic, often discovered on routine radiographs
3. Painless expansion of cortical plates
4. Similar lesion, called “brown tumor,” occurs with hyperparathyroidism; resolves without treatment
E. Radiographic appearance (Fig. 8.10A and B)
1. Well-delineated unilocular or multilocular radiolucent defect with noncorticated margins
2. Displacement of teeth; divergence and resorption of tooth roots with pain and swelling
3. Radiographic findings are not diagnostic
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Benign lesion composed of proliferating multinucleated giant cells, in a delicate connective tissue stroma, mixed with plump, ovoid, or spindle-shaped cells
2. Abundant hemorrhage and deposition of hemosiderin pigment
3. Histology identical to “brown tumor” of hyperparathyroidism, a systemic condition which must be ruled out
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Thorough curettage (more than one treatment may be necessary)
2. Surgical removal
3. Radiation therapy is contraindicated
4. Propensity for recurrence
5. Treatment or removal not indicated in cases of hyperparathyroidism; lesion will resolve when systemic condition resolved


FIG. 8.10Radiographs of central giant cell granulomas showing multilocular radiolucencies. (A) The mandible. (B) The maxilla. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Chronic Hyperplastic Pulpitis (Pulpal Granuloma, Pulp Polyp)
A. Etiology—chronically inflamed pulp tissue, in tooth with large open carious lesion
B. Age and gender—children and young adults; no gender predilection
C. Location
1. Most often in primary molars or permanent first molars
2. Can occur in any tooth with a large, open, carious lesion
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.11)
1. Benign red to pink outgrowth of pulp tissue protruding from occlusal surface
2. Hyperplastic tissue is asymptomatic
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Pulp tissue; may be covered with stratified squamous epithelium
2. Acute and chronic inflammatory cells present
3. Granulation tissue
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Endodontic treatment of involved tooth
2. Extraction of unrestorable tooth
3. Prognosis—good


FIG. 8.11Chronic hyperplastic pulpitis (pulp polyp) (arrow). From Neville BW. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. 4th ed. Elsevier; 2016.
Internal Resorption
A. Etiology—unknown but may be related to:
1. Pulpal trauma or injury
2. Inflammatory response to caries
B. Age and gender—any age; no gender predilection
C. Location—within pulp chamber or canal; most frequently in permanent dentition
D. Clinical features
1. Benign but aggressive process that early on may only be detected radiographically
2. Crown may display pink spot or coloration (“pink tooth of Mummery”) when expanding highly vascularized pulpal tissues approach and show through enamel surface
E. Radiographic appearance—defined radiolucency within enlarging pulp chamber or root canal, reflecting resorption and loss of hard tissue—initially dentin (Fig. 8.12)
F. Histologic characteristics—highly vascularized pulpal tissue with increased odontoclastic activity adjacent to dentin-pulp interface (odontoclasts are tooth resorbing cells); chronic inflammation
G. Treatment—process may perforate through root or crown, results in tooth extraction; endodontic therapy useful to stop process if perforation has not occurred


FIG. 8.12Radiograph showing an area of internal resorption on the maxillary first molar (arrow). From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Apical Granuloma (Periapical Granuloma, Chronic Apical Periodontitis)
A. Etiology—dental caries, deep restorations, trauma; a response to pulpal necrosis
B. Age and gender—any age; no gender predilection
C. Location—apex of a nonvital tooth
D. Clinical features
1. Benign condition associated with nonvital tooth
2. Fistula or parulis may be present if condition is longstanding
3. Affected tooth most often asymptomatic, may be sensitive to percussion
E. Radiographic appearance—varies from well-defined, circular, radiolucent lesion at apex of involved tooth to diffuse radiolucency or thickening of periodontal ligament space (Fig. 8.13A)
F. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.13B)
1. Inflammatory response: lymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages
2. Dense, fibrous connective tissue
3. Residual epithelial rests (remnants of tooth-forming tissues), but no epithelial lining
G. Treatment—endodontic therapy or extraction of affected tooth


FIG. 8.13(A) Radiograph of a periapical granuloma. (B) Low-power microscopic appearance of a periapical granuloma. A, From Neville B, Damm DD, Allen CM, et al. Color Atlas of Oral and Maxillofacial Diseases. Elsevier Inc.; 2019. B, From Neville B. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. 4th ed. Elsevier Inc.; 2016.
Follow for extended description
Benign Bone Lesions
General Characteristics
A. Etiology—most often unknown but may have hereditary component
B. Onset—gradual, with slow development or enlargement
C. Early stages—asymptomatic
D. Bone expansion may result in malocclusion or thinning of cortical bone
Osteoma
A. Etiology—unknown, can be associated with autosomal dominant condition; Gardner’s syndrome
B. Age and gender—more common in young adults but can be found at any age; no gender predilection
C. Location—most common posterior mandible; rarely seen outside bones of head and neck; most often arises on bone surface
D. Clinical features—benign tumor of compact bone; asymptomatic, grows slowly; detected by palpation
E. Radiographic appearance
1. Well-circumscribed radiopaque mass
2. Panoramic or lateral plate radiograph may be needed to view entire lesion (Fig. 8.14)
F. Histologic characteristics—extremely dense, compact bone or coarse, cancellous bone
1. Compact osteomas—radiopaque, have minimal marrow tissue
2. Cancellous osteomas—have fibrofatty marrow, may have radiolucent center
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical excision for large lesions
2. Does not recur


FIG. 8.14Radiograph of an osteoma showing a radiopacity (arrow) of the posterior mandible. Courtesy Dr. Sidney Eisig. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Chondroma
A. Etiology—unknown, multiple chondromas may be associated with inherited disorders
B. Age and gender—ages 30 to 40 years; no gender predilection
C. Location
1. Rare in oral cavity
2. Occur in body locations where normal cartilage is found
3. May involve body of the mandible, coronoid, or condylar process
D. Clinical features
1. Benign tumors of mature cartilage; asymptomatic
2. Slow, progressive swelling of the jaw may loosen or malposition teeth
3. Malignant transformation in oral lesions considered rare
E. Radiographic appearance—irregular radiolucent or mottled; may displace surrounding teeth or cause root resorption
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Composed of well-differentiated hyaline cartilage with foci of calcification
2. Mature cartilage cells occur individually with lacunae
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical removal indicated
2. Clinical characteristics may mimic malignant chondrosarcoma; requires adequate biopsy sampling to rule out malignant neoplasm
3. Periodic follow-up evaluation is necessary to detect recurrence or rare development of chondrosarcoma
Odontogenic Myxoma
A. Etiology—unknown; odontogenic neoplasm that originates from mesenchymal tissue of tooth germ
B. Age and gender—most often in young adults, ages 10 to 30 years; no gender predilection
C. Location—mandible more often than maxilla
D. Clinical features—benign but aggressive lesion within bone; small lesions asymptomatic; expansion of bone with larger lesions
E. Radiographic appearance (Fig. 8.15)
1. Unilocular or multilocular radiolucency, may have “honeycomb” or “soap bubble” appearance. Fig. 8.15 shows multilocular honeycombe radiolucency in right mandible. Note the malpositioned third molar
2. Displacement or resorption of adjacent teeth may occur
3. Margins are irregular, diffuse, and not well defined
4. Large lesions may have appearance similar to ameloblastoma
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Loose myxoid stroma containing stellate, spindle-shaped, and round cells
2. Tumor not encapsulated; see infiltration of adjacent tissues
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Complete surgical excision difficult (not encapsulated and loose tumor consistency)
2. Recurrence is common (25%); metastasis does not occur


FIG. 8.15Radiograph of a myxoma showing multilocular, honeycombed radiolucency. From Regezi J, Sciubba J, Jordan RCK. Oral Pathology: Clinical Pathologic Correlations. 7th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2017.
Torus Palatinus
A. Etiology—inherited, autosomal dominant; genetic and/or environmental factors. Both Torus Palatinus and mandibular torus have a genetic and ethnic predisposition. Both masticatory stressors from bruxing and clenching have been implicated, as well as environmental factors related to injuries such as burns and blunt force trauma that affect the bone
B. Age and gender—usually seen by the age of puberty; rarely observed in children; peak incidence occurs before 30 years; more common in females (2:1)
C. Location—midline of the hard palate
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.16A)
1. Benign hard protuberance of bone in midline of hard palate
2. Variety of shapes—nodular; lobulated; smooth (flat); spindle
3. Occurs in 20% to 35% of US population
4. Torus may appear ulcerated due to trauma of thin overlying mucosa
E. Radiographic appearance—dense radiopaque area
F. Histologic characteristics—dense lamellar cortical bone
G. Treatment—usually none, surgical removal indicated if interferes with maxillary denture or other prosthodontic appliance


FIG. 8.16(A) Clinical appearance of a lobulated torus palatinus. (B) Clinical appearance of bilateral mandibular tori. From Odell E. Cawson’s Essentials of Oral Pathology and Oral Medicine. 9th ed. Elsevier; 2017.
Follow for extended description
Torus Mandibularis
A. Etiology—inherited, autosomal dominant; genetic and/or environmental factors
B. Age and gender—first observed in early teen years; slightly more common in males
C. Location—lingual surface of the mandible above the mylohyoid line in area of premolars; most often bilateral
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.16B)
1. Benign protuberance of bone; varies in size and shape
2. Nodular, lobulated, or smooth; slow growing
3. Most often occur bilaterally (90%)
E. Radiographic appearance—dense radiopaque area
F. Histologic characteristics—dense cortical lamellar bone
G. Treatment—surgical excision if the lesion interferes with mandibular denture or other prosthodontic appliance
Odontoma
A. Etiology—odontogenic origin; arises from odontogenic epithelium and mesenchyme that gives rise to teeth
B. Age and gender—usually seen in adolescents and young adults, mean age 14 years; no gender predilection
C. Location—more frequently seen in maxilla (especially anterior maxilla for compound type) than in the mandible; usually between the roots of teeth or near apices; complex odontomas seen more often in posterior mandible
D. Clinical features
1. Most common type of “odontogenic “tumor” since their prevalence exceeds all other odontogenic tumors combined
2. Often associated with failure of a permanent tooth to erupt; blocks eruption pathway
3. Asymptomatic
4. Composed of tooth, hard tissues, and pulp; not considered a true neoplasm
E. Radiographic appearance—irregular mass of radiopacities or tooth-like structures surrounded by a narrow radiolucent halo
1. Cyst involvement may occur in association with an odontoma
2. Two types of odontomas
a. Compound—tooth-like structures (“toothlets”) are identified radiographically and are surrounded by a radiolucent zone (Fig. 8.17)
b. Complex—appears as a radiopaque mass (can be confused with other lesions in bone) and their presence often blocks tooth eruption (Fig. 8.18)
F. Histologic characteristics—epithelial and mesenchymal differentiation of odontogenic tissues; result is disorganized formation of dental hard tissues and pulp; described as a developmental anomaly or a hamartoma rather than a true neoplasm. A hamartoma is a composition of components such as dentin, cementum, pulp, and enamel.
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Complete surgical removal (both forms are well encapsulated)
2. Prognosis—good


FIG. 8.17Radiograph of a compound odontoma, showing a collection of numerous, small, tooth-like radiopacities (arrows) surrounded by a radiolucent halo. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.


FIG. 8.18Radiograph of a complex odontoma showing a radiopaque mass surrounded by a radiolucent halo (arrow). From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Gingival Fibromatoses
General Characteristics
A. Enlargement of gingival tissue, sometimes completely covering tooth crowns
B. Composed of a proliferation of dense fibrous connective tissue
C. Classification includes:
1. Irritative fibromatosis—localized areas of gingival enlargement; associated with outside irritants
2. Hereditary fibromatosis—genetic-linked enlargement of gingival tissue
3. Chemical fibromatosis—drug-influenced enlargement of gingival tissue
Irritative Fibromatosis
A. Etiology—irritants such as mouth breathing, orthodontic appliances, bacterial plaque biofilm, dental calculus, debris, overhanging restorations, or ill-fitting dental appliances
B. Age and gender—any age; no gender predilection
C. Location—localized areas interproximal papillae; in mouth breathers, on maxillary and mandibular anterior labial gingiva
D. Clinical features—solitary round, smooth-surfaced, pink enlargement of gingival papillae; well attached to surrounding structures
E. Histologic characteristics—proliferation of dense fibrous connective tissue with increased numbers of fibroblasts and inflammatory response
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Removal of irritant
2. Improved oral hygiene
3. Gingivectomy in severe cases
4. Prognosis is excellent once cause is removed
Hereditary Gingival Fibromatosis (Gingival Enlargement of Genetic Origin)
A. Etiology (see the section on “Genetics” in Chapter 7)
1. Hereditary, believed to have genetic or developmental origin; or be related to hormonal imbalances; a component of multiple syndromes (e.g., Zimmerman-Laband, Cross, Rutherfurd, Murray-Puretic-Drescher, Cowden)
2. Contributing factors include poor oral hygiene, food impaction, calculus, and malocclusion
3. Other associated conditions include growth hormone deficiency, hypothyroidism, epilepsy, and intellectual and developmental disabilities (IDDs)
B. Age and gender—appears during the eruption of primary or permanent teeth; slightly more common in females
C. Location—excessive enlargement of interproximal gingival tissues; can be localized; labial and buccal areas are most affected
D. Clinical features
1. Gingival enlargement may be generalized or localized
2. Diffuse, smooth-surfaced, pink, firm tissue involving the interproximal papillae
3. Multiple protruding pink, stippled, firm masses; teeth may be displaced; delays eruption of teeth
E. Histologic characteristics—bundles of fibrous connective tissue with fibroblasts and fibrocytes (depending on the formative stage)
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Gingivectomy
2. Meticulous oral hygiene
3. Recurrence is common
Chemical Fibromatosis (Drug-Influenced Gingival Enlargement)
A. Etiology—reaction to drugs, specifically phenytoin (Dilantin), with the highest implication; calcium channel blockers, including nifedipine (Procardia), amlodipine (Norvasc), diltiazem (Cardizem), and verapamil (Calan); cyclosporin, an immunosuppressant drug given in association with organ transplants
B. Age and gender—no gender predilection
C. Location—gingiva, especially gingival papillae
D. Clinical features—smooth, pink, firm enlargement of the gingival papillae (Fig. 8.19A–C)
E. Histologic characteristics—extensive proliferation of connective tissue
F. Treatment
1. Change prescribed medication, if possible
2. Gingivectomy—surgical removal of the excess tissue may be the only way to attempt to control the symptoms. The gingiva usually continues to grow, and additional surgery is usually needed. Erupting teeth may need help erupting through the thick tissue
3. Improved oral hygiene and self-care


FIG. 8.19Drug-influenced gingival enlargement. (A) Gingival enlargement caused by phenytoin (Dilantin). (B and C) Gingival hyperplasia caused by nifedipine (Procardia). A, Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. B and C, Courtesy Dr. Victor M. Sternberg. A–C, From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Ulcers and Ulcerative Conditions
General Characteristics
Depressed lesions can either be ulcers which extend through the epithelium into the dermis, or they may be erosions which do not extend through the epithelium. Erosions can also be called abrasions. When a lesion or growth grows outside or outward from the surface of the tissue such as a fibroma, it is termed exophytic. When the lesion is growing downward into the surrounding tissue, it is termed endophytic. A lesion may be ulcerative but also have these varying characteristics as well. Palpation is important when examining a lesion to determine if the growth is exophytic or endophytic.


A. Ulcer—formed by destruction of surface epithelium and exposure of underlying connective tissue
B. Factors aiding in the diagnosis of ulcerative conditions and ulcer types occurring in the oral cavity include:
1. Number and size
2. Location
3. Depth
4. Borders
5. Clinical history (personal, health, cultural, pharmacologic)
C. Etiology—not always known
D. Can be classified as acute or chronic
1. Acute ulcerative conditions include traumatic ulcers, aphthous ulcers, allergic reactions, and viral ulcerations
2. Chronic ulcerative conditions include those caused by or associated with systemic diseases, such as leukemia, colitis, malnutrition, tuberculosis, syphilis, gonorrhea, deep fungal infections, sickle cell anemia, Crohn disease, Bechet disease, Reiter syndrome, Lupus erythematosus, and drug toxicity
Traumatic Ulcer
A. Etiology—various types of trauma; history of lesion plays a significant role in determining the diagnosis
1. Physical—biting or traumatizing the mucosa, ill-fitting denture, toothbrush injury, sharp tooth, or fractured filling rubbing against soft tissue (Fig. 8.20A and B)
2. Chemical—strong oral rinses, phenol, and chemicals used during dental procedures; misuse of toothache medications (placement of aspirin or garlic placement adjacent to tooth may result in soft tissue burn (Fig. 8.21A and B); garlic placement has been noted and used in various cultures to relieve tooth or tissue pain)
3. Thermal—hot foods (e.g., soup) (Fig. 8.22A); crack cocaine (Fig. 8.22B)
4. Electrical—especially in young children, electrical cords often contact commissures of mouth and lips
B. Age and gender—any age; no gender predilection
C. Location—most frequently lateral border of the tongue, buccal mucosa, lips, palate (tori especially vulnerable)
D. Clinical features
1. Small, single, oval, round, or irregular shape
2. Flat or slightly depressed
3. Covered by necrotic debris or fibrinous coat; may be surrounded by erythematous halo
4. Painful for 2 to 5 days
5. Most heal within 7 to 14 days
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Loss of surface epithelium (denuded)
2. Fibrinous exudate covering exposed connective tissue
3. Infiltration of PMNs within connective tissue
4. Fibroblastic activity can be a prominent feature
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Removal of the irritant or cause
2. Application of benzocaine to relieve symptoms/aloe vera may be used in mild cases
3. Corticosteroids (recommended by some, whereas others suggest corticosteroid medications can delay healing)
4. Topical dyclonine hydrochloride for temporary relief
5. Systemic antibiotics may be given in severe cases to prevent secondary infection (surgical debridement may be needed depending on extent of tissue damage)
6. With electrical burns, tetanus immunization advised
7. Caution with persistent chronic ulcerations; may need biopsy to rule out squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
8. Prognosis—good


FIG. 8.20(A) Traumatic ulceration caused by irritation of gingiva by fingernails. (B) Traumatic ulcer caused by a denture. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description


FIG. 8.21Mucosal burns. (A) Burns caused by aspirin. (B) Chemical burn caused by contact with caustic material during endodontic treatment. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description


FIG. 8.22Mucosal burns. (A) Thermal burn of palate caused by contact with hot soup. (B) Ulcer of midline of palate caused by heat generated during the use of crack cocaine. A, From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014. B, From Mitchell-Lewis DA, Phelan JA, Kelly RB, Bradley JJ, Lamster IB. Identifying oral lesions associated with crack cocaine use. J Am Dent Assoc. 1994;125:1104.
Follow for extended description
Necrotizing Ulcerative Gingivitis (Formerly Called Acute Necrotizing Gingivitis or ANUG; Vincent’s Infection, Trench Mouth)
The term acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (ANUG) was often applied to this condition due to its acute clinical presentation and rapid onset.


A. Etiology
1. Anaerobic bacteria—spirochete and fusiform species, including Fusobacterium nucleatum (previously Bacillus fusiformis) and Borrelia vincentii (associated with decreased resistance to infection)
2. Recent technology identified involvement and contributions of other bacterial species
3. Contributory factors
a. Systemic—strong association between depressed systemic immunity and NUG, stress, fatigue, poor hygiene, malnutrition, recent illness
b. Local—poor restorations, trauma, gingivitis, poor oral hygiene, heavy smoking
B. Age and gender—any age, usually 17 to 35 years; no gender predilection
C. Location—free gingival margin; crest of gingiva; interdental papillae
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.23)
1. Acute gingivitis with extensive tissue necrosis of interdental papillae
2. Results in blunted, “punched-out,” crater-like interdental spaces covered with gray pseudomembrane of necrotic tissue and debris with sloughing of tissue
3. Foul (fetid) mouth odor, intense gingival pain, spontaneous gingival bleeding, bad taste—often cited as a metallic taste
4. Headache, low-grade fever, malaise
5. Regional lymphadenopathy
6. May be seen in association with infectious mononucleosis
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Ulcerated stratified squamous epithelium
2. Thick fibrinous exudate containing PMNs
3. Significant bacterial colonization
4. Connective tissue infiltrated by dense numbers of inflammatory cells
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Scaling and debridement (patient may need several visits)
2. Use of ultrasonic instruments (except when contraindicated)
3. Topical or even local anesthetic may be necessary to perform treatment.
4. Use of an oxygenating rinse four or more times daily for 1 to 2 weeks
5. Chlorhexidine rinses or diluted hydrogen peroxide rinses
6. Use of systemic antibiotics such as penicillin, tetracycline, or erythromycin, may be indicated if patient has systemic signs or symptoms such as a fever, lymphadenopathy, or both; evaluation for infectious mononucleosis may be indicated
7. Home care to improve oral hygiene status (e.g., power toothbrush, interdental cleaning)
8. Follow-up appointments important to evaluate recovery and therapy, and reinforce oral self-care regimens
9. Recurrences are possible if associated risk factors persist or return


FIG. 8.23Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Recurrent Aphthous Stomatitis/Recurrent Ulcerative Stomatitis
RAU is part of what is known as Immune System Disorders. During evolution the human body has acquired ways in which we defend ourselves from natural predators such as animals, the environment (environmental conditions), and organisms. The body defends against viruses, bacteria, parasites, and fungi. The body’s natural defenses against microorganisms’ function in two ways: (1) nonspecific immunity and (2) adaptive immunity. The diseases listed in this section have oral manifestations and involve the immune system. RAUs may also be called Canker sores, aphthous stomatitis or periadenitis (Sutton disease), or mucosa necrotica recurrens. RAUs are the most commonly seen ulcerations in the oral cavity. The RAUs are found on nonkeratinized tissue, such as the buccal mucosa, vestibule, the labial mucosa, the ventral surface of the tongue, the oropharynx, and the floor of the mouth.


A. Etiology
1. Autoimmune inflammatory condition (T cell–mediated response)
2. Destruction of mucosal tissue barrier; increased antigen exposure
3. Inherited familial predisposition or acquired immunodysregulation
4. Systemic disorders associated with aphthous stomatitis:
a. Hormonal imbalance—premenstrual (incidence increases), pregnancy (incidence decreases)
b. Psychological—anxiety, depression, acute emotional problems, stress
c. Allergies—asthma, hay fever, food, drug
d. Hematologic abnormalities
e. Infectious agents (microorganisms)
f. Behçet disease (see section under mucosal and skin disorders)
g. Crohn’s disease—a multifactorial disease associated with a strong genetic predisposition and environmental host factors. Oral manifestations include major aphthous ulcers
h. Ulcerative colitis—aphthous ulcers are found at a higher rate in ulcerative colitis
i. Acquired or inherited immunodysregulation disorders, such as cyclic neutropenia
j. Celiac disease (Sprue)—patients with Celiac disease have a much higher rate of aphthous ulcers as an ongoing part of the disease
B. Age and gender—childhood to adolescence and young adults; more common in females
C. Location—buccal and labial mucosa, soft palate, pharynx, tongue; more common in the anterior regions
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.24)
1. Ulcerations—oval or round in shape with distinct borders; the center of the ulcer has yellowish to white fibrinous surface; surrounded by an erythematous (red) halo
2. Range from 1 to 12 in number (3–10 most common)
3. Size—3 to 10 mm
4. Pain out of proportion to small size of lesion, tenderness, discomfort
5. Interference with functions—speech, eating
6. Prodromal period of 1 to 2 days; characterized by tingling or burning sensation in area where ulcer will appear
7. Associated systemic signs can include low-grade fever and localized lymphadenopathy
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Superficial erosion of mucosal tissue covered by fibrinopurulent layer
2. Connective tissue demonstrates increased vascularity.
3. Increase in PMNs, lymphocytes, and histiocytes
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Self-limiting, healing in 10 to 12 days; recurrent episodes common
2. Topical corticosteroids; chlorhexidine rinse; topical tetracyclines
3. Betamethasone syrup (rinse and expectorate)


FIG. 8.24Example of a major aphthous ulcer. Image exhibits an ulcerative surface with a lighter surrounding color/halo effect. Courtesy Dr. Richard J. Vargo, DMD, MBA, DABOMP, FAAOM, FICD.
Recurrent Major Aphthous Ulcers (Periadenitis, Mucosa Necrotica Recurrens, Sutton Disease)
Very large RAUs are termed major RAUs and referred to as Sutton disease and noted with Crohn's disease. They are deeper and more crater like, with irregular borders.


A. Etiology
1. Autoimmune inflammatory condition (T cell–mediated response)
2. Destruction of mucosal tissue barrier, increased antigen exposure
3. Inherited predisposition or acquired immunodysregulation (e.g., human immunodeficiency virus [HIV], acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [AIDS])
B. Age and gender—usually young adults, onset after puberty; more common in females
C. Location—labial mucosa, buccal mucosa, soft palate, posterior fauces
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.24)
1. More common in patients with HIV and Crohn’s diseases
2. Single or multiple large ulcers; 1 to 10 in number and 1 to 3 cm in diameter; may be seen clinically in forms such as major, minor, herpetiform, and herpes simplex virus
3. Crater-like formations with irregular shapes
4. Lesions heal in 3 to 6 weeks; may produce scarring
5. Extremely painful
6. Occur at frequent intervals; patient is rarely without an ulcer
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Fibrinopurulent membrane covering large, ulcerated area
2. Necrotic epithelium
3. Intense inflammatory cell infiltration within connective tissue
4. Neutrophils and lymphocytes present
5. Granulation tissue present at base of the lesion
6. Microscopic picture nonspecific; definitive diagnosis must include clinical and historical data
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Corticosteroids (systemic or topical)
2. Injection of lesion with triamcinolone acetonide
3. Halobetasol propionate ointment
4. Healing is slow and may take weeks to months
5. Recurrence is common


FIG. 8.25A Example of minor aphthous ulcers located on the labial mucosa. Courtesy Carol Perkins, BA, AS, RDH.
Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid (Cicatricial Pemphigoid, Benign Mucous Membrane Pemphigoid)
A. Etiology—autoimmune disease; type 2 hypersensitivity reaction to specific protein in basement membrane of epithelium (laminins)
B. Age and gender—ages 50 to 65 years; more common in females (2:1)
C. Location
1. Gingiva
2. Oral mucous membranes
3. Eyes, nasal, esophageal, and vaginal mucosa
4. Skin
D. Clinical features
1. Vesicles or bullous lesions that rupture, leave denuded (desquamated) painful exposed connective tissue on mucosa or skin. Clinical signs often mimic other mucosal disease, states such as oral lichen planus. Patients may not show any improvement and exhibit long-term disease progression.
2. “Desquamative” gingivitis with sloughing of oral mucosa is a generic term, not solely descriptive of this condition.
3. Painful scarring of eye conjunctiva may occur leading to scarring; cicatricial (cicatrix = scar)
E. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.26):
1. Split forms between surface epithelium and underlying connective tissue at basement membrane, subepithelial vesicles, and bullae
2. Epithelium appears to be detached from connective tissue
3. Mild trauma may induce vesicle or bulla formation; phenomenon known as Nikolsky’s sign
4. No evidence of acantholysis (degeneration of cohesive elements between epithelial cells, as seen in pemphigus)
5. Inflammatory infiltrate within connective tissue
6. Direct immunofluorescence shows a linear pattern of staining at basement membrane.
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Mild forms—topical corticosteroids; may be applied to oral mucosa in fabricated custom trays
2. High doses of systemic corticosteroids may be indicated with severe bullous eruptions. Patient should be referred to a specialist who treats this disorder. There is often confusion with benign mucous membrane pemphigoid and pemphigus vulgaris and other mucosal diseases, such as oral lichen planus. Each would need different treatment modalities.
3. Early referral to an ophthalmologist is required since eye involvement can evolve to be severe enough to cause blindness and may not show symptoms in early stages or may not be recognized in many cases.
4. Conjunctiva of eye may be affected with scarring (called symblepharon); can result in blindness and early diagnosis with treatment is crucial.
5. Patients go through periods of remission; long-term disease progression occurs in most cases.


FIG. 8.26Histologic appearance of pemphigoid. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Viral Infections
Viruses can be cytoxic or nontoxic. Cytotoxic viruses replicate within the host cells and destroy them, releasing new viral particles into adjacent tissues. These particles go on to invade other host cells, allowing progressive cellular destruction to take place. As more host cells are destroyed, more symptoms develop. In healthy immune systems, the virus is usually contained and destroyed. We are exposed to viruses daily. When the body is in a weakened state, we become more susceptible to infection.


General Characteristics of Herpes Simplex Virus Infections
A. Type 1: commonly affects face and oral cavity
B. Type 2: sexually transmitted form of virus, mostly genital mucosa
C. Common features: latency, prodromal signs and symptoms
Primary Herpetic Gingivostomatitis
A. Etiology
1. Virus—initial infection (first encounter) with HSV
2. Member of the human herpesvirus (HHV) group from family of Herpesviridae.
3. Transmission—droplet infection; direct contact; highly contagious (amount of virus is highest in the vesicle stage); patients can self-inoculate; spread to other areas of skin or mucous membranes (especially the eyes)
B. Age and gender—ages 6 months to 6 years; no gender predilection
C. Location—lips, gingiva, tongue, pharynx, floor of the mouth, buccal mucosa
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.27A–C)
1. Systemic signs and symptoms
a. Abrupt onset of fever
b. Headache, irritability
c. Regional lymphadenopathy
2. Oral signs and symptoms
a. Gingivitis, sore mouth, pain on swallowing
b. Initially, tiny vesicles (pinhead size) quickly rupture to form ulcerations
c. Painful ulcers 1 to 3 mm in size; covered by a yellow fibrinous surface
d. May coalesce to form shallow craters with bright erythematous margins (“halo”)
e. Most acute phase is days 3 to 7
E. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Cytologic smear (noninvasive and inexpensive test)
2. Blood test for HSV
3. Viral isolation from tissue culture (best diagnostic procedure, but up to 2 weeks to obtain results)
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Intraepithelial vesicles filled with fluid
2. Cells show “ballooning” degeneration
3. Acantholysis of epithelium with formation of Tzanck cells; Tzanck cells are free-floating epithelial cells caused by acantholysis (loss of cohesiveness between the cells). These cells are also diagnostic for pemphigus vulgaris when there is separation of the epithelial tissues.
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Symptomatic therapy—bed rest, fluids (to prevent dehydration especially very young children)
2. Antiviral medications such as acyclovir (“swish and swallow”) started within first few days
3. Medications to reduce pain and discomfort
4. Self-limiting; healing in 7 to 14 days
5. Virus can remain dormant in (trigeminal or other) ganglion
6. Recurrence not usual for primary herpes


FIG. 8.27(A) Example of primary herpetic gingivostomatitis in a child. (B and C) Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis in an adolescent. A, Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. B and C, From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Herpes Labialis (Secondary or Recurrent Herpes Simplex, Cold Sore, Fever Blister)
A. Etiology
1. Reactivation of latent virus (HSV) residing in trigeminal ganglion
2. Stimuli that can trigger reactivation include:
a. Exposure to sunlight
b. Trauma (including dental treatment)
c. Menstruation
d. Emotional stress, anxiety, fatigue
e. Allergic reactions
f. Systemic diseases
B. Age and gender—adults; no gender predilection
C. Location
1. Lips—most common (hence term: herpes labialis)
2. Reactivation can also occur intraorally—hard palate, attached gingiva (keratinized mucosa fixed to bone)
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.28A and B)
1. Prodromal (before lesion erupts) sensation—burning, tingling, itching, or soreness in area where vesicles eventually will appear
2. Fluid-filled vesicles (most contagious state); fluid contains virus
3. Vesicles may appear in clusters and coalesce into a larger blister called a bulla (bullae pl.), eventually rupture, and crust
4. Danger via contaminated dental instruments for spread to fingers and hands of dental personnel (herpetic whitlow)
5. Contact of virus with eye can lead to herpes eye disease and severe ocular complications
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Intraepithelial blister (vesicle) filled with fluid; ruptures to leave ulcer
2. Cells display “ballooning degeneration”
3. Acantholysis of mucosa with formation of Tzanck cells (used to help diagnose a variety of cutaneous infectious and blistering diseases)
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Antiviral drugs (e.g., acyclovir, valacyclovir) especially effective if given during the prodromal period
2. Prophylactic treatment with antivirals before encountering risk factor
3. Topical application of 10% n-docosanol cream (Abreva) has been effective
4. Self-limiting; healing in 7 to 10 days
5. Sunblock to prevent development on lips
6. Chlorhexidine rinses, acyclovir suspension, or both can be helpful to treat intraoral recurrent HSV
7. Recurrence common


FIG. 8.28Herpes labialis. (A) Twelve hours after onset. (B) Forty-eight hours after onset. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Herpes Zoster (Shingles)
A. Etiology
1. Reactivation of latent varicella-zoster virus (VZV, HHV-3)
2. VZV causes chickenpox, which is considered the primary infection with VZV
3. Depression of cell-mediated immunity
4. Risk factors important for reactivation of VZV
a. Systemic disease (malignancies, Hodgkin disease, leukemia)
b. Drug toxicity, radiation, alcohol abuse
c. Advanced age
d. Extreme fatigue
e. Immunosuppression
B. Age and gender—any age but more common in adults, usually over 50 years; no gender predilection
C. Location—skin or mucosa, supplied by affected sensory nerve; any of the three branches of trigeminal nerve (Fig. 8.29); most often has distinctive unilateral distribution (considered pathognomonic, meaning virtually diagnostic)
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.30A–C)
1. Three phases—prodromal, acute, chronic
2. Prodromal period 1 to 3 days before eruption of unilateral rash, pain which can be accompanied by systemic features such as fever, severe headaches, malaise, and lymphadenopathy
3. Acute phase of erythematous rash, evolves into vesicles; pain becomes more intense with burning, tingling, or stabbing sensation
4. Clusters of vesicles develop along the distribution pathway of a sensory nerve; vesicles contain virus and are considered infectious
5. Intraoral lesions appear unilaterally as multiple vesicles with white centers, eventually form shallow ulcerations; on movable or attached mucosa
6. Chronic phase of postherpetic neuralgia possible; residual effect after acute condition resolved
E. Treatment and prognosis
1. Antiviral medications (acyclovir, valacyclovir, famciclovir)
2. Postherpetic neuralgia is difficult to treat; therapies utilized include analgesics, narcotics, corticosteroids, anticonvulsants; biofeedback, and nerve block
3. Cutaneous vesicular lesions should be kept clean and dry to prevent secondary infection (antibiotics may be prescribed if secondary infection occurs)
4. Antibacterial oral rinses for intraoral lesions
5. Varicella (chickenpox) vaccines are available for children and adults: Varicella Varivax for children, Zostavax for individuals 60 years and older, and Shingrix for healthy people over 50 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC] Recommendations). The CDC recommends 2 doses of recombinant zoster vaccine (RZV) to prevent shingles and related complications in adults aged ≥50 years. The CDC also recommends 2 doses of RZV for adults aged ≥19 years who are or will be immunodeficient or immunosuppressed.
6. Ocular involvement serious complication when VZV affects maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve; can result in blindness
7. Prognosis is good in healthy individual, with healing in 2 to 3 weeks
8. Recurrence can occur but not usual


FIG. 8.29Divisions of the trigeminal nerve. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.


FIG. 8.30Herpes zoster. (A) Unilateral distribution of vesicles along a sensory nerve. (B) Many vesicles coalesce to form large lesions. (C) Unilateral facial lesions occurring along the distribution of the maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Herpangina
A. Etiology—coxsackievirus group A, and a number of other enteroviruses
B. Age and gender—children age 6 months to 5 years; no gender predilection
C. Location—posterior hard or soft palate, fauces (pillars), uvula, tonsils; most likely seen in the summer
D. Clinical features
1. Systemic symptoms
a. Comparatively mild and of short duration
b. Sore throat, dysphagia, headache, dry mouth, lack of tears, dark urine that is limited, indicating dehydration
c. Fever, fatigue, sunken eyes
d. Headache; vomiting; diarrhea
e. Transmission through fecal-oral route or contact with droplets from sneezing or coughing
2. Oral symptoms (Fig. 8.31)
a. Erythematous macules usually on soft palate or tonsillar areas
b. Become fragile vesicles; rapidly ulcerate into 2 to 4 mm size ulcers
c. Vesicles are often overlooked
d. Two to six small ulcers; ulcers appear with a gray base and inflamed periphery
e. Slightly painful; the affected person has difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)
f. Sudden onset—mild to moderate symptoms
g. Erythematous pharynx
E. Laboratory tests
1. Viral isolation (throat culture during early stage)
2. Stool specimens
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Self-limiting, with few complications
2. Nonaspirin pain relievers—aspirin treatment has been linked to Reye’s Syndrome in children. Reye’s Syndrome affects the liver and brain promoting sudden swelling; therefore, nonaspirin pain relievers are the treatment of choice. Lidocaine anesthetics may provide relief for the throat region
3. Usually resolves within 7 days without treatment. Avoid citrus drinks and hot beverages
G. Hand, foot, and mouth disease is a mild illness; also caused by coxsackievirus group A and a number of other enteroviruses; ulcers similar to herpangina can present in the throat and other locations in the mouth, including tongue; skin of hands and feet affected and important for diagnosis; highly contagious; surfaces should be wiped down with antiseptic; frequent hand washing is advised


FIG. 8.31Herpangina. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Infectious Mononucleosis (Glandular Fever, “Kissing Disease”)
A. Etiology
1. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV, HHV-4)
2. Transmission—via saliva; “kissing disease”; intimate contact; sharing drinking/eating utensils
B. Age and gender—predominantly young adults (15–24 age group); children (transmission through saliva on toys); no gender predilection
C. Clinical features
1. Systemic signs and symptoms (depending on age)
a. Fever, chills, prodromal fatigue, malaise
b. Sore throat, pharyngitis, enlarged tonsils with pus
c. Headache
d. Nausea, vomiting
e. Prominent lymphadenopathy—large tender nodes (however, in adults over 40, less than 30% exhibit lymphadenopathy)
f. Enlarged spleen (danger of rupture)
g. Neurologic disorders, including seizures
2. Oral signs and symptoms
a. Palatal petechiae (pinpoint hemorrhages)
b. Pharyngitis, enlarged tonsils with white patches of pus
c. May occur in association with necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis
d. Inflamed attached gingiva, soft palate, and uvula
D. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Increased white blood cells (WBCs) with atypical, activated lymphocytes; presence of these atypical lymphocytes in peripheral blood is very characteristic
2. Increased heterophil antibody titer; positive Paul-Bunnell test in young adults but not in children under 4 years old; Children under 4 years of age will show more false negatives
3. Indirect immunofluorescence test for EBV
E. Treatment and prognosis
1. Bed rest
2. Nonaspirin antipyretics and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
3. Benign and self-limiting; fatigue may last longer
4. Usually resolves in 4 to 6 weeks
5. Complications can include splenic, hepatic, and neurologic involvement
Mucosal and Skin Disorders
General Characteristics
A. Characterized by various forms and sizes of ulcerative eruptions
B. Lesions may appear first or during the course of the disease
C. Reaction may simulate an allergic-type reaction
Erythema Multiforme
A. Etiology
1. Exact etiology unknown, thought to be a hypersensitivity reaction
2. Approximately 50% have exposure to a known trigger such as previous HSV infection, other microorganisms, such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae; drugs (e.g., antibiotics such as penicillins and cephalosporins, barbiturates, sulfonamides); in 50% a specific trigger cannot be identified.
3. Immunologic response
B. Age and gender—young adults ages 20 to 30 years; more common in males
C. Location
1. Extremities—hands, feet, arms, legs
2. Skin—macular, papular, or bullous eruptions; characteristic “target” or “bull’s-eye” lesions in 50% of cases
3. Oral findings—lips, labial and buccal mucosa, tongue, floor of the mouth, soft palate
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.32A–D)
1. Systemic symptoms
a. Abrupt onset
b. Prodromal symptoms (e.g., fatigue, malaise, fever)
c. May have had previous occurrences
d. Has been seen in association with other systemic conditions
e. Characteristic skin lesions referred to as bull’s-eye, target, or iris
2. Oral symptoms
a. Generally lips, tongue, and buccal mucosa
b. Red patches develop into multiple, painful ulcerations; onset is explosive
c. Macules, papules, or vesicles ulcerate and bleed easily
d. Ulcer with raw tissue base and a grayish, necrotic slough
e. Irregular shape; surrounded by a band of inflammation; encrustations
f. Edema and extensive hemorrhagic crusting vermilion of lips
E. Laboratory tests—direct and indirect immunofluorescent studies not useful for definitive diagnosis; may be used to rule out other vesiculobullous diseases
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Mixed inflammatory infiltrate
2. Intraepithelial or subepithelial vesicle formation
3. Necrotic basal keratinocytes
4. Histopathologic characteristics are nonspecific
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Removal of the cause, if identified or suspected
2. Topical or systemic applications of corticosteroids
3. Mild antibacterial oral rinses; antibiotics if risk of secondary infection
4. Intravenous rehydration may be necessary if cannot drink fluids or eat due to significant oral pain
5. Condition resolves in 2 to 4 weeks
6. Recurrence is possible


FIG. 8.32Skin lesions of erythema multiforme. (A) Target lesion (arrow). (B) Bullae. (C) Crusted lip lesions with edema, ulceration, and erythema. (D) Erythematous and ulcerated lesions of the lips and buccal mucosa. A, Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. A–D, From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (Erythema Multiforme Major) Toxic Epidemal Necrolysis
A. Severe bullous form of erythema multiforme
B. Etiology—unknown; most often triggered by a drug rather than an infection
C. Age and gender—children and young adults under 25 years; more common in males; history of previous similar illness
D. Location—oral cavity, skin; in addition lesions involving the eyes or genitals must be present for this diagnosis
E. Clinical features (Fig. 8.33)
1. Oral symptoms—bullae rupture, leaving ulcerations with a raw base; eating becomes impossible; lips are severely encrusted and bleed easily
2. Skin lesions—severe, numerous; cover wide areas of the body (face, chest, abdomen)
3. Eye involvement—severe conjunctivitis, photophobia, corneal ulceration, scarring, and potential for blindness
4. High risk for severe dehydration
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Antibiotics and corticosteroids to control severity
2. Antiviral medications to reduce recurrent episodes if HSV infection a trigger
3. Duration of 1 to 4 weeks
4. May require hospitalization
5. Prognosis is usually good
6. Mortality rate is 2% to 10% with this form of erythema multiforme


FIG. 8.33Stevens-Johnson syndrome. Courtesy Dr. Sidney Eisig. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Behçet Disease
A. Etiology—rare disease of unknown etiology; persons with HLA-B51 antigen, a gene in immune system, are predisposed to this condition
B. Age and gender—young adults; no gender predilection
C. Location—now considered a multisystem disorder, Behçet disease is characterized by triad of affected areas: oral, ocular, and genital areas are involved; two of the three areas must be involved for the diagnosis
1. Oral cavity—oral lesions first manifestation in majority of cases
2. Eyes are involved in up to 85% of cases, with greater severity in men
3. Genital lesions occur in 75% of cases, with more symptoms reported in men
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.34)
1. Oral lesions
a. Painful ulcerations similar to minor or major aphthous ulcers; occur in about 40% of Behçet patients (3% of these have herpetiform variety of ulcers)
b. Large ulcers with gray or yellow center surrounded by a red border
c. Oral ulcerations involve the soft palate and oropharynx
2. Eye lesions
a. Begin with photophobia and irritation
b. Purulent conjunctivitis and uveitis
c. Healing may be followed by scar formation and blindness
d. Hypopyon (pus in anterior chamber of eye between iris and cornea) in severe cases; rare
3. Genital lesions
a. In females—painful ulcerations in the vagina, vulval folds, and labia majora
b. In males—painful ulcerations on the scrotum and base of the penis
4. Systemic signs and symptoms
a. Occasionally fever; pallor
b. Complications can involve the central nervous system (CNS), cardiac, vascular, and pulmonary systems
c. Arthritis involving knees, wrists, elbows, and ankles
E. Laboratory tests and findings
1. No laboratory test is diagnostic; however, cutaneous pathergy test is often positive
2. Definitive clinical criteria for diagnosis have been established
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Histopathologic features are nonspecific
2. Endothelial proliferation in lesions
3. Characteristics similar to those in aphthous stomatitis
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Early aggressive therapy for patients with severe clinical manifestations
2. Systemic and topical corticosteroids
3. Other immunosuppressive drugs are given for systemic and ocular involvement
4. Lesions last 2 to 4 weeks
5. Disease is long lasting with periods of remission
6. Mortality is low; most often associated with CNS involvement, pulmonary hemorrhage, or bowel perforation


FIG. 8.34Oral lesion seen in Behçet syndrome. Aphthous-like oral mucosal ulcer. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Pemphigus Vulgaris
A. Etiology—severe, progressive autoimmune disease that affects skin and mucous membranes
B. Age and gender—adults, usually between ages 40 and 55 years; no gender predilection
1. More common in Ashkenazic Jews, South Asians, or persons of Mediterranean descent
C. Location—anywhere on oral mucosa; eyes, or skin including vaginal, penile, and anal surfaces. Patient should be evaluated by an ophthalmologist for eye involvement.
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.35A and B)
1. In over 50% of cases, oral lesions appear first; skin lesions can erupt many months or even a year later. Many dental offices fail to recognize the early signs of pemphigus vulgaris and patients may fail to be diagnosed correctly for longer periods of time. Often the oral signs may appear to the examiner to be other mucosal disease states, such as erosive oral lichen planus. Immunofluorescence is helpful in differentiation of the types of mucosal diseases including pemphigus vulgaris.
2. Blisters, vesicles, or bullae (caused by an abnormal production of autoantibodies) collapse as soon as they are formed.
a. Vary in shape and size (from several millimeters to several centimeters)
b. Ragged peripheral borders; flat or shallow; base intensely red and raw; may extend into lips with crusting
3. Necrotic film or slough of tissue can be detached from underlying tissue
4. Neighboring soft tissue appears normal
5. Positive Nikolsky’s sign—an intraoral bulla can form under light pressure or slight rubbing with cotton swab or tongue blade; same reaction can occur if pressure is applied to skin
6. Pain may be severe, with inability to eat
7. Salivation may be profuse; mouth odor
8. Gingival desquamation (sloughing)
E. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Biopsy with microscopic analysis
2. Direct immunofluorescence used to identify antibodies (intercellular)
3. Indirect immunofluorescence positive in 80% to 90%, shows circulating autoantibodies in serum; may be used to monitor progress of therapy
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Vesicle or bulla entirely intraepithelial, above the basal cell layer, produces a distinctive “split”; basement layer remains attached to underlying connective tissue
2. Intercellular bridges between epithelial cells disappear, with loss of cohesiveness; epithelial cells separate (acantholysis)
3. Clumps of enlarged epithelial cells, termed Tzanck cells, are present
4. Inflammatory cell infiltration in underlying connective tissue
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Systemic corticosteroids, monoclonal antibodies, and referral to a center who treats this disease is important. The earlier the recognition, the more favorable the outcome for the patient
2. Other immunosuppressive drugs such as azathioprine, methotrexate may be used in addition to corticosteroids and rituximab is usually the medication of choice
3. Titers of circulating autoantibodies measured using indirect immunofluorescence
4. New medications and treatment have produced much better progress in controlling this disease. Several new medications are being introduced into the treatment
5. Mortality is under 10% and associated with complications from long-term corticosteroid therapy. Monoclonal atibiody medication is the treatment of choice in most cases
6. Potential side effects associated with long-term systemic corticosteroids include type 2 diabetes mellitus, adrenal suppression, increased chance of malignancy, infections such as candidiasis, local thinning of the epidermis, dermal changes such as atrophy, telangiectasia, striae, easy bruising, hypopigmentation, delayed wound healing along with fungal, and bacterial infections


FIG. 8.35(A and B) Examples of oral lesions in pemphigus vulgaris. B, Courtesy Dr. Fariba Younai. A and B, From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Conditions Associated With Hyperkeratosis (White Lesions)
General Characteristics
White lesions occurring in the oral tissues are due to a buildup of keratin and may be very subtle or very noticeable with a thick coated appearance.3


A. Build-up of keratin on keratinizing or nonkeratinizing epithelium
B. Clinical term leukoplakia is often associated with hyperkeratosis; literally means white patch or plaque
C. Vary from simple localized lesions to diffuse lesions with broad coverage; smooth to rough surfaces; elevated to flat
D. Color—white, grayish white, yellowish white
E. Painless
F. Associated with a variety of conditions (including variants of normal, systemic disease, and premalignant lesions). When the etiology of the keratinized tissue cannot be determined, such as a sharp broken restoration, a biopsy is needed to obtain a diagnosis. Biopsy determines the malignancy of the lesion and also assigns a tumor stage to the submission. This staging is called the TMN: T describes the primary tumor site and size, N describes the lymph node involvement, M describes the presence or otherwise distant metastatic spread3
Nicotine Stomatitis
A. Etiology—heavy tobacco smoking using cigarettes, cigars, water pipe (hookah), or pipe (“pipe smoker’s palate”)
B. Age and gender—most common in male smokers over 40 years
C. Location—posterior hard and soft palates
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.36)
1. Response to irritant (heat, smoke); begins with erythema and inflammation
2. Result is increased keratinization; turns palate grayish white; scattered erythematous nodules represent inflamed minor salivary duct openings
3. Thick keratin may form fissures or cracks creating a wrinkled appearance
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Marked hyperkeratosis and acanthosis
2. Thickened epithelium surrounding inflamed salivary gland duct openings
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Benign condition which is reversible when irritant—smoking is removed
2. Not considered precancerous, prognosis good if smoking stopped and tissues return to normal
3. Biopsy may be indicated for tissues that do not return to normal


FIG. 8.36Nicotine stomatitis. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Linea Alba
A. Etiology—impact of occlusion on buccal mucosa creates linear impression of teeth; due to pressure of teeth against buccal mucosa
B. Age and gender—any age; no gender predilection
C. Location—buccal mucosa along the occlusal plane; usually bilateral
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.37A)
1. “White line” on buccal mucosa, extends anterior to posterior along the line of occlusion
2. Localized, single line, varies in prominence; usually bilateral. Leukoedema (Fig. 8.37B) may also be confused or be in conjunction with lina alba. Additionally, patients may exhibit a habit of “cheek chewing,” also termed Morsicatio Buccarum. Cheek chewing is a compulsive behavior that may be extensive and exhibit a thick keratin appearance. It is sometimes confused with other mucosal diseases, such as reticular lichen planus.
E. Histologic characteristics—hyperorthokeratosis; some localized intracellular edema
F. Treatment and prognosis—no treatment required. The patient may need reassurance. Patients may often see a white line and be concerned about malignancy. Patients with Morsicatio Buccarum may need assistance in breaking the habit of cheek chewing. Sometimes compulsive behaviors need intervention techniques to eliminate the activity. A referral to a professional trained in eliminating compulsive behaviors may be needed.


FIG. 8.37(A) Linea alba.
(B) Leukoedema legend: Opaque whiteness with opalescent appearance of the buccal mucosa that disappears when the tissue is stretched. A, From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.B, Courtesy of Richard J. Vargo, DMD, MBA, DABOMP, FAAOM, FICD Director, Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology Associate Professor, Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology St. Louis Dental Center Missouri School of Dentistry & Oral Health A.T. Still University St. Louis, MO.
Follow for extended description
Leukoedema (Fig. 8.37B)
A. Etiology—unknown; variant of normal
B. Age and gender—average age 45 years; no gender predilection; African Americans are most affected racial group
C. Location—bilateral buccal and labial mucosa
D. Clinical features
1. Appearance is that of a soft, diffuse, opalescent, bluish film over buccal mucosa
2. Later becomes gray to white with coarsely wrinkled surface
3. When tissue is stretched, opalescence disappears (this clinical characteristic helps with establishing diagnosis)
4. Research demonstrates it may be more prominent in smokers
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Intracellular edema of prickle cells (spinous layer)
2. Increased thickness of epithelium with a superficial parakeratotic layer several cells thick
3. Broad rete pegs that appear irregularly elongated
F. Treatment and prognosis—no treatment required; considered variant of normal
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
A. Etiology—unknown, autoimmune disease involving multiple body systems
1. Cellular and humoral immunity are impaired
2. Increased activity B lymphocytes; abnormal T lymphocyte function
B. Age and gender—much more common in females (8:1) during childbearing years; African American females more affected than white females (3:1); average age 31 years
C. Location
1. Buccal mucosa, palate, gingiva (25%–30% of persons with SLE)
2. Skin—lesions occur in 85% of persons with SLE; a characteristic erythematous butterfly-shaped rash on the face crossing bridge of nose (malar areas); chest, back, extremities; exposure to sunlight makes rash worse
D. Systemic characteristics
1. Fever, weight loss, arthritis, muscle pain
2. Raynaud’s phenomenon is seen in up to 15% of persons with SLE
3. CNS involvement, depression, and seizures
4. Ocular involvement; retinal nerve damage
5. Kidney involvement (complications can be fatal)
6. Cardiac involvement (pericarditis)
7. Warty vegetations affecting heart valves (Libman-Sacks endocarditis)
E. Clinical features (Fig. 8.38A–B)
1. Skin lesions—erythematous rash; scales form, scarring in the center; butterfly configuration on the malar areas of the face and nose
2. Among those with SLE, 25% to 30% have oral manifestations
3. Erythematous plaques with white striae; can resemble lichen planus but is less defined. The palate may be one of the first areas to exhibit a redness and an ulcerative surface resembling a palatal burn from hot liquids
4. Burning mouth; xerostomia; candidiasis
F. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Direct immunofluorescence of skin lesion (95% effective for SLE)
2. Direct immunofluorescence of normal skin showing a positive lupus band in 25% to 60% of persons with SLE
3. Anemia; leukopenia; thrombocytopenia
4. Positive identification of antinuclear antibodies (ANAs); not very specific for SLE
5. Anti–double-stranded DNA antibodies, a specific finding in up to 80% of patients with SLE
G. A combination of these test findings, multiorgan involvement, skin lesions, and possible oral lesions can all play a role in establishing the definitive diagnosis.
H. Histologic characteristics
1. Hyperkeratosis; alternating changes within the spinous layer of the epithelium
2. Necrosis of the basal cell layer
3. Inflammatory infiltrate around blood vessels in the connective tissue, not in a subepithelial band as seen in lichen planus
4. Subepithelial edema
I. Treatment and prognosis
1. Aspirin and NSAIDs
2. Antimalarial and corticosteroids combined with other immunosuppressive medications
3. Periods of remission in mild cases—prognosis is good; with significant organ involvement, disease can be fatal; prognosis is worse for men
4. Consult with patient’s physician before dental treatment; prophylactic antibiotic premedication may be necessary (when heart valve involvement)
5. Patients should avoid exposure to sunlight because ultraviolet light can exacerbate or precipitate disease activity.


FIG. 8.38(A and B) Oral lesions in lupus erythematosus. Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
White Sponge Nevus (Cannon Disease, Familial White Folded Dysplasia)
A. Etiology—hereditary; autosomal dominant trait; mutation in mucosal keratins K4 or K13; high degree of penetrance with varying degree of expressivity
B. Age and gender—progressive from childhood to adulthood; no gender predilection
C. Location—bilateral buccal mucosa is always affected (sometimes soft palate, ventral tongue, floor of mouth)
D. Clinical features
1. Asymptomatic white, velvety, thickened, and folded mucosal tissue (especially buccal mucosa); depending upon the clinical presentation, white sponge nevus may be clinically diagnosed as oral lichen planus or other mucosal disease states
2. Diffuse, generalized, and bilateral
3. Early years—the white mucosa is smooth and flat; becomes corrugated over time
4. Adolescence—tissues become increasingly folded or corrugated; appear opalescent-white when the condition peaks
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Thickened epithelium with hyperparakeratosis and acanthosis
2. Perinuclear condensation of keratin tonofilaments in the superficial cells of the epithelium
3. Cells of the spinous layer toward the surface exhibit vacuolation (space filled with fluid or air)
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Benign condition, no treatment required, no malignant transformation
2. In adults, important to distinguish from premalignant or malignant lesions
3. Prognosis excellent (Fig. 8.39A)


FIG. 8.39Lichen planus. (A) White Sponge Nevus: Observe the extensive keratotic plaques that extend into the mucobuccal folds. (B) and (C). Two additional examples of lichen planus. A, From DeLong L. Burkhart NW. General and Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. Enhanced 3rd ed. Jones & Bartlett Learning; 2019. Courtesy Dr. John Wright, DDS, MS, Texas A&M College of Dentisry, Regents Professor, Oral Pathology Professor. B and C, Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Lichen Planus
A. Etiology—unknown, immunologically cell-mediated mucocutaneous disorder
B. Age and gender—middle-aged adults; slight predilection for females
C. Location—skin; oral mucosa; especially buccal mucosa, dorsal tongue, gingiva, and palate. Cutaneous lichen planus occurs usually on the flexor surfaces, scalp, nails, and genital tissue. Lesions may be purple, pruritic, polygonal-shaped papules
D. Clinical features—The World Health Organization has classified lichen planus as an OPMD: (oral potentially malignant disease). Multiple forms are reticular, plaque-like, papular, erosive/atrophic, and bullous types4
1. Reticular lichen planus (most common) (Fig. 8.39B and C)
a. White, narrow, interconnecting, slightly elevated lines forming a mesh, net, or lace-like pattern (Wickham’s striae); lesions can also appear as white papules; cannot be wiped off. This type presents as the least problematic, and it is the least likely to develop any malignancy.
b. Mucosa between white lacy lines appears normal
c. On dorsal tongue, may appear solid gray to white and plaque-like
d. Usually asymptomatic, but the patient may complain of roughness on the buccal mucosa when touching the area with the tongue.
2. Erosive or ulcerative form
a. Lesions are symptomatic; pain is a feature
b. Condition begins as an erosive flat lesion
c. Erythematous area is ulcerated, painful, and surrounded by fine white borders
d. Increased risk for squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in persons with erosive lichen planus has been reported; frequent reevaluation appointments with extraoral and intraoral examination required
e. Prominent atrophy and ulceration of gingiva described as “desquamative” gingivitis (Fig. 8.40); this feature is not diagnostic and can appear with other oral conditions. The ulcerative form is the most likely to be misdiagnosed and has the most malignant transformation rate
E. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.41)
1. Hyperparakeratosis or hyperorthokeratosis of surface epithelium
2. Thickened spinous layer (acanthosis)
3. Intracellular edema of cells in spinous layer
4. Necrosis or degeneration of basal cell layer
5. Band-like inflammatory infiltrate of lymphocytes causing the basal cell layer to be infiltrated and liquified. Basal cell layer is lost and not distinguishable
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Biopsy is often needed for a definitive diagnosis since erosive oral lichen planus may be confused with other conditions such as pemphigoid and pemphigus vulgaris; treatment for symptomatic cases; often not needed for reticular lichen planus
2. Corticosteroids to decrease ulcerations and inflammation (local or systemic for severe cases)
3. Topical corticosteroids (e.g., fluocinonide) applied several times a day when necessary with instruction on medication application
4. Meticulous oral hygiene with more frequent appointments; hand scaling may be needed in many instances with severe inflammation
5. Lesions are self-limiting; most heal in a few weeks with topical corticosteroid therapy
6. Condition does recur; reapplication of corticosteroids needed
7. Frequent reevaluation of patients with erosive lichen planus important
8. Referral of women for vaginal evaluation that may be related to oral lichen planus20


FIG. 8.40Lichen planus. The gingival lesions of lichen planus are described clinically as desquamative tissue. Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.


FIG. 8.41Lichen planus seen by low-power microscopy. Note the degeneration of the basal cell layer of the epithelium (B) and the band-like infiltrate of lymphocytes (L). From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Hyperkeratosis Due to Irritation
A. Etiology—local factors; constant, low-grade irritation (frictional keratosis; chronic tongue chewing and cheek biting (morsicatio buccarum) is a repetitive irritation); vitamin A deficiency can also cause excessive keratinization of skin and mucous membranes
B. Age and gender—usually over age 40 years; more common in males
C. Location—anywhere in the oral cavity; alveolar ridge, buccal mucosa, lateral tongue
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.42A and B)
1. Benign reactive phenomenon; attempt to protect underlying tissues from persistent irritation or trauma
2. Often appears as white flat lesion with a diffuse boundary, may have jagged surface
3. Three layers of epithelium affected: granular, prickle, and basal cell layers
4. Fissures or ulcerations rare
E. Laboratory tests—biopsy indicated for persistent or suspicious lesions
F. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.42C)
1. Excessive keratinization of normal mucosa
2. Normal underlying connective tissue
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Removal of cause (irritant)
2. Tissue should return to normal


FIG. 8.42(A) Frictional keratosis (arrow) caused by an opposing third molar. (B) Caused by chronic tongue chewing. (C) Low-power microscopic appearance of hyperkeratosis showing an increase in the amount of surface keratin (K). From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Neoplasia
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC) affects 657,000 individuals worldwide with 330,000 deaths. In the United States in 2025, 59,660 new oral/pharyngeal cancer cases are expected, with a 5-year survival rate of 50% and a death rate of 12,770. This amounts to 2.9% of all new cancer cases (SEER Data Reports: National Cancer Institute). Worldwide, 275,000 cancers of the oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers occur annually. Neoplasia means new growth, and the cells of a neoplasia exhibit abnormal and uncontrolled proliferation. Cells undergo changes that are passed on to new cells. Early diagnosis and treatment is extremely important to limit new growth, and early diagnosis promotes a better outcome for the patient. Neoplasia may cause cells to transform when exposed to certain chemicals, radiation, or viruses. The tumors may be benign or malignant. Benign tumors are usually encapsulated, which acts as a containment for the cells of the tumor. Malignant cells may be pleomorphic (vary in size and shape) and hyperchromatic (darker nuclei with mitotic characteristics). Although the nasopharyngeal cancer rate is 0.7 cases per 100,000 in the United States annually, the numbers are 40,380-fold higher in countries such as China and Southeast Asia, and in natives of the Arctic region, North Africa, and the Middle East.1,5,6


A. Etiology—multifactorial etiology; contributions of intrinsic and extrinsic factors is important (e.g., chemicals, viruses, radiation; secondary to genetic mutation; immunosuppression); Fanconi Anemia is a rare inherited condition that puts the individual at risk of developing rare cancers and blood disorders
1. Associated risk factors include use of tobacco and alcohol and increasing age
2. Oncogenic viruses, such as HPV 16 and 18, are major risk factors for posterior oropharyngeal cancer, including the base of the tongue and tonsils. However, younger individuals with no known risk factors have developed these cancers in high numbers
3. Combinations of risk factors can be lethal
4. Iron deficiency anemia; especially severe form is “Plummer-Vinson” syndrome; elevates the risk for SCC in the posterior mouth and esophagus
B. Age and gender—young adults to adults in their 60s, 70s, and beyond
1. Incidence increases with age
2. Sixth most common cancer in males and twelfth in females. One hundred forty-five deaths per day.
3. Ratio of incidence in males and females is 2:1
4. Highest overall incidence in white males over 65; highest incidence in middle age found in African American males
C. Locations
1. Tongue—37% to 50%, excluding cancer of the pharynx Posterior third and including lateral borders and ventral surfaces; majority of cases
2. Floor of the mouth—30% to 35%
3. Lips—22%; most lower lip; pipe, cigar smokers, patients with fair skin, and persons with an outdoor occupation (farmers and fisherman) or hobby (water sports and golfing) who are exposed to sunlight (Fig. 8.43A and B)
4. Buccal mucosa—6%
5. Gingiva—6%
6. Soft palate—4%
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.44A–C)
1. SCC accounts for 90% to 95% of oral cancers
2. Appearance within oral cavity variable; can resemble or mimic other lesions
3. Common features: exophytic, indurated, ulcerated, firm, anchored to underlying tissues
4. Sores or ulcerations that do not heal
5. On lower lip; asymptomatic crusted ulceration mimicking chapped lip; indurated rolled border with loss of the vermillion border.
6. Invasion of tumor cells into adjacent tissues is a feature; can destroy bone; result in paresthesia or dysesthesia of tongue or lips
7. Metastasis (spread of cancerous cells) to regional lymph nodes and distant sites occurs. Neoplasia is staged through the TNM system of cancer staging. The tumor is staged by the growth in the whole body and is based on assessment of the size of the primary tumor (T), the involvement of locoregional lymph nodes (N), and distant metastases (M) (Table 8.1).3,4,18
E. Radiographic appearance (Fig. 8.44D)
1. Diffuse radiolucency with irregular borders (after significant bone destroyed); penetration into cortex (“moth-eaten appearance”)
2. Resorption and displacement of tooth roots
F. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Biopsy—biopsy is “gold standard” for definitive diagnosis
a. Incisional—removal of a segment or piece of lesion for microscopic analysis
b. Excisional—removal of entire lesion in question for microscopic analysis
2. Screening tools, in addition to oral examination, that have been used for oral cancer include brush biopsy, ViziLite, and VelScope Vx (for a discussion on these, see section on “Diagnostic Tools for Oral Cancer Detection” in Chapter 16)
G. Histologic characteristics
1. Islands or sheets of malignant (neoplastic) squamous cells, often invading down from surface into underlying connective tissue
2. Keratin pearls (cluster of concentrically layered keratinized cells) may be a feature denoting malignancy.
3. Malignant cells often display anaplastic features, such as altered size and shape, large hyperchromatic nuclei and increased numbers of abnormal to bizarre mitotic figures
H. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical excision alone or excision with a combination of radiation and chemotherapy; occasionally radiation therapy alone
2. Tumor size and location influence treatment protocols
3. Adjunctive chemotherapeutic agents
4. Metastasis from oral cavity to lymph nodes in neck may require radical neck dissection (procedure to remove lymph nodes)
5. Prognosis depends on tumor stage and host response to treatment


FIG. 8.43(A and B) Clinical appearance of squamous cell carcinoma of the lower lip. Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description


FIG. 8.44(A) Clinical appearance of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the posterolateral tongue showing an exophytic, ulcerated mass. (B) Clinical appearance of SCC of the left side of the soft palate and fauces. (C) Clinical appearance of SCC on the floor of the mouth. (D) Left side of a panoramic radiograph showing destruction of the mandible by SCC. C, Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. A, B, and D, From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Table 8.1


Stages of Cancer
Stage 0        Abnormal cells are present but have not spread to nearby tissue. Also called carcinoma in situ, or CIS. CIS is not cancer, but it may become cancer.
Stage I, stage II, and sage III (may also be written as stage 1, stage 2, and stage 3)        Cancer is present. The higher the number, the larger the cancer tumor and the more it has spread into nearby tissues.
Stage I, stage II, and stage III (may also be written as stage 1, stage 2, and stage 3)        Cancer is present. The higher the number, the larger the cancer tumor and the more it has spread into nearby tissues.
Stage IV (may also be written as Stage 4)


https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/diagnosis-staging/staging


The cancer has spread to distant parts of the body.
Pleomorphic Adenoma (Benign Mixed Tumor)
A. Etiology: Pleomorphic Adenoma is a benign tumor that accounts for 80% of benign salivary gland tumors. It is the most common benign salivary gland neoplasm. The tumors comprise 53% to 57% of parotid gland tumors and 44% to 68% of submandibular tumors. Arising from the proliferation of two different types of salivary gland cells: ductal and myoepithelial. Chromosomal alteration has been identified3
B. Age and gender—most common in adults ages 30 to 50 years; female predilection; can occur in children, but this is rare
C. Location
1. Most common location is parotid gland
2. Posterior hard or soft palate; unilateral
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.45)
1. Intraoral most common location on either side of the midline, posterior palate
2. Painless, slow growing, firm
3. Smooth, dome-shaped mass, not ulcerated (unless traumatized)
4. Size from a few millimeters to a few centimeters
5. In parotid may arise in close proximity to facial nerve; risk of nerve damage on removal
6. Careful palpation is crucial in identifying this tumor clinically, looking for asymmetry, tenderness, etc.
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Encapsulated tumor composed of variable glandular epithelial, mesenchymal-like stromal components; usually found at the angle of the mandible or the lower lobe of the parotid gland
2. Capsule may be incomplete or show infiltration of tumor cells
3. Most benign; malignant transformation in less than 5% of cases
4. Other salivary gland tumors must be ruled out since the pleomorphic adenoma may mimic other tumors as well
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Total surgical excision or conservative enucleation not recommended, since they are associated with high reoccurrence rates. Follow-up with the patient is needed because of the reoccurrence possibility
2. Partial or complete removal of the parotid gland may be necessary. The facial nerve can be involved, and careful excision is needed to preserve the nerve
3. Research reports about 5% risk of malignant transformation. This type of salivary gland tumor has been associated with smoking habits
4. Prognosis excellent with total excision


FIG. 8.45Benign salivary gland tumor (pleomorphic adenoma). From Odell E. Cawson’s Essentials of Oral Pathology and Oral Medicine. 9th ed. Elsevier; 2017.
Cysts of the Head and Neck
General Characteristics
A. True cyst
1. Sac-like structure lined by epithelium, often contains fluid and/or soft material such as keratin and cellular debris
2. May be surrounded by or enclosed within connective tissue
3. All true cysts have an epithelial lining; pseudocysts (false cysts) are entities not lined by epithelium.
B. Cysts are often classified according to:
1. Etiology, histologic components, location
2. Tissue origin (odontogenic, nonodontogenic, or inflammatory)
Radicular Cyst (Apical Cyst, Periapical Cyst)
A. Etiology
1. Odontogenic origin and the most common odontogenic cyst; epithelial rests of Malassez may be stimulated due to fracture or injury of the tooth. Proliferation occurs when an inflammatory process develops.
2. Associated with a nonvital tooth
3. Contributing factors include dental caries, trauma, deep restorations causing irreversible pulpitis, pulp necrosis
B. Age and gender—any age, but common ages 30 to 60 years
C. Location—apex of a tooth or lateral to tooth root (accessory lateral pulp canals)
D. Clinical features
1. Always in association with nonvital tooth, and failure to remove the cyst results in recurrence or a residual cyst
2. Most often asymptomatic
E. Radiographic appearance
1. Round or ovoid, well-defined radiolucent area attached to apex or lateral to root (Fig. 8.46A)
2. Loss of lamina dura in area; root resorption is possible
3. Radiographic appearance same as apical granuloma
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Lined by epithelium; develops from residual epithelial rests of Malassez (remnants of Hertwig’s epithelial root sheath)
2. Cyst wall composed of well-vascularized dense fibrous connective tissue; often with pronounced inflammatory infiltrate (Fig. 8.46B)
3. Lumen may contain fluid or cellular debris
G. Treatment
1. Endodontic therapy
2. Extraction of the tooth with curettage of socket and apical area to remove cystic sac and epithelial remnants
3. Retreatment endodontically if radiolucency persists; apicoectomy may be required
4. Periodic follow-up to ensure resolution


FIG. 8.46Radicular cyst. (A) Radiograph showing a well-circumscribed radiolucency around the root of a tooth (arrow). (B) Microscopic features of a radicular cyst. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Residual Cyst
A. Etiology
1. Remnants of apical cyst, left after tooth extraction (apical cyst incompletely removed); odontogenic
2. Open socket with debris and inflammation may act as stimulus
B. Age and gender—most often adults, previous history of apical cyst
C. Location (Fig. 8.47A)
1. Area previous tooth extraction with prior apical cyst
2. Adjacent to socket area or within alveolar ridge
D. Clinical features—similar to apical cyst, usually asymptomatic
E. Radiographic appearance (Fig. 8.47B)
1. Well-defined radiolucent area
2. Round or oval in shape
3. Radiolucency may develop radiopaque rim
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Cyst lined with epithelium
2. Dense fibrous connective tissue wall
G. Treatment—surgical remova


FIG. 8.47(A) Schematic of a residual cyst. (B) Radiograph of a residual cyst showing a radiolucency at the site of a previously extracted tooth. Courtesy Drs. Paul Freedman and Stanley Kerpel. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Developmental Cysts
A. Etiology
1. Median mandibular cyst—cyst in midline of mandible; questionable origin but currently thought to arise from odontogenic epithelium; rare
2. Globulomaxillary cyst: the Globulomaxillary cyst was previously considered to be a fissual cyst. This term is no longer used, and these are usually found to be diagnosed as an odontogenic keratocyst (OKC) in most cases5
3. Nasolabial cyst—soft tissue cyst; develops from the inferior and anterior segments of the nasolacrimal duct; strong female predilection (4:1)
4. Median palatine cyst—fissural cyst arises from trapped epithelial remnants; more posterior location than nasopalatine duct cyst; young adults
5. Nasopalatine duct cyst (incisive canal cyst)—develops from epithelial remnants of nasopalatine ducts; male predilection. Most common nonodontogenic developmental cyst of the oral cavity.
B. Age and gender—adults; no gender predilection
C. Location—cyst names are based on location
1. Median mandibular cyst—midline of anterior mandible
2. Nasolabial cyst—soft tissue of upper lip, lateral to midline; in mucolabial fold near maxillary canine and floor of nose
3. Median palatine cyst—midline of hard palate
4. Nasopalatine duct cyst—within or adjacent to nasopalatine canal or incisive papilla; may appear heart-shaped
D. Clinical features
1. Cysts vary in size from no visible clinical evidence to a bulge or expansion of bone
2. Vitality testing necessary to rule out nonvital pulp, if within bone and located adjacent to teeth
E. Radiographic appearance—well-defined radiolucent area; some have particular shapes due to their anatomical location
1. Nasopalatine duct (incisal canal) cyst is often heart-shaped due to extension between central incisors (Fig. 8.48A)
2. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.48B) of median mandibular cyst—most often lined by stratified squamous epithelium; few cases of pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium
3. Nasolabial cyst—lined by pseudostratified columnar epithelium with goblet cells and cilia
4. Median palatal cyst—lined by stratified squamous epithelium
5. Nasopalatine canal cyst—several types of epithelium are found in this cyst along with tissue remnants of nasopalatine duct
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Removal of cystic sac and curettage
2. Prognosis is excellent


FIG. 8.48(A) Radiograph of a nasopalatine duct cyst with well-circumscribed radiolucency between and apical to the roots of the maxillary central incisors.
A, From Neville B, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC. Oral and Maxillofacial Oral Pathology. Elsevier Inc.; 2024. From Neville B. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. 5th ed. Elsevier Inc.; 2024.
(B) The lining of the cyst is a flattened cuboidal epithelial lining. From Neville B, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC. Oral and Maxillofacial Oral Pathology. Elsevier Inc.; 2024. From Neville B. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. 5th ed. Elsevier Inc.; 2024.
Follow for extended description
Thyroglossal Tract Cyst (Thyroglossal Duct Cyst)
A. Etiology—develops within embryonic thyroglossal tract; inflammatory stimulus possibly associated with adjacent lymphoid tissue, draining infection from head and neck. Considered the most common developmental cyst of the neck making up to 4% of all neck masses2
B. Age and gender—most often young adults under 20 years; no gender predilection
C. Location—midline of neck along thyroglossal tract, which extends from foramen cecum (posterior tongue) to permanent position of thyroid gland in the neck; cyst can be found as far down as suprasternal notch; 75% of these cysts are below the hyoid bone (Fig. 8.49A)
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.49B)
1. Fluctuant (fluid-filled) asymptomatic; movable swelling in midline of neck
2. Bulge is round or oval shaped; varies in size up to 10 cm diameter
3. Fistulous tracts to the skin or mucosa can develop
4. Swallowing becomes difficult (dysphagia) when cyst located adjacent to base of tongue. Dysphonia (a change in voice quality) is noted with larger lesions. Airway obstruction may occur
5. Inability to extend the tongue may occur
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Cysts are lined with ciliated columnar epithelium, squamous epithelium, or other types of epithelium
2. Connective tissue wall may contain remnants of residual thyroid tissue
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Complete surgical excision of cyst (after a thyroid scan) and testing of other thyroid tissue is performed before any tissue removal
2. Prognosis is good
3. Malignant transformation rare


FIG. 8.49(A) Thyroglossal tract extends from the area of the foramen cecum, lingual to the lower part of the neck. (B) Thyroglossal tract cyst is the cause of enlargement at the midline of the neck. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Cervical Lymphoepithelial Cyst (Branchial Cleft Cyst)
A. Etiology
1. Classic theory is development from epithelial remnants of embryonic branchial arches
2. About 95% appear to develop in region of second branchial arch
3. Another theory is possible epithelium entrapped within cervical lymph nodes
B. Age and gender—young adults between the ages of 10 and 40; no gender predilection
C. Location: can occur both intra- and extraoral; most often unilateral
1. Oral lymphoepithelial cyst—posterior floor of mouth, lateral border of tongue
2. Cervical lymphoepithelial cyst—located on lateral neck near anterior border of sternocleidomastoid muscle
3. Area from clavicle to parotid gland
D. Clinical features
1. Slow-growing, fluctuant, movable mass 1 to 10 cm in diameter; asymptomatic
2. Can have a pink to yellowish color when found intraorally
3. May be mistaken for parotid swelling or odontogenic infection
E. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.50)
1. Lined by stratified squamous epithelium that may or may not be keratinizing
2. Lymphoid tissue within connective tissue wall
F. Treatment and prognosis involve good extraoral examination with palpation for detection of these types of cysts. Follow-up is very important.
1. Surgical removal
2. Prognosis is good


FIG. 8.50Low-power microscopic appearance of a lymphoepithelial cyst showing lumen (Lu), epithelial lining (E), surrounding lymphocytes (L), and connective tissue (CT).
(From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.)
Dermoid Cyst
A. Etiology—developmental, from all three germ layers: ectoderm, endoderm, mesoderm; benign cystic form of teratoma (teratomas are a type of germ cell tumor that can contain different types of tissue elements, such as hair, muscle, bone, teeth)
B. Age and gender—present at birth or in young children; occurs in the 10 to 30 year age range with no gender predilection
C. Location
1. Within oral cavity, anterior floor of the mouth; can displace tongue
2. Ovarian teratomas, or “dermoids,” may contain actual tooth structures
D. Clinical features
1. Semifirm, dough-like consistency
2. Size—a few millimeters to several centimeters
3. Midline floor of the mouth
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Lined with orthokeratinized stratified squamous epithelium
2. Keratin within the lumen
3. Fibrous connective tissue wall
4. May contain sebaceous glands, hair follicles, sweat glands
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical removal; approach depends on location relative to the geniohyoid muscle
2. Prognosis is good
Lateral Periodontal Cyst
A. Etiology—odontogenic origin; develops from rests of dental lamina
B. Age and gender—adults over 30 years; common ages 50 to 70 years; male predilection
C. Location—most often lateral root surface of mandibular canine or premolar teeth (occasionally seen in the maxilla in the same areas)
D. Clinical features
1. Tooth or teeth involved are vital
2. Asymptomatic; no bone expansion
E. Radiographic appearance
1. Small; less than 1 cm
2. Well-defined ovoid or elliptically shaped unilocular radiolucent area found lateral to tooth root (Fig. 8.51A)
3. Multilocular variant may occur; botryoid odontogenic cyst (BOC) is closely related to the LPC; most common in the mandibular cuspid and premolar area
4. Odontogenic keratocyst (OKC) or keratocystic odontogenic tumor (KCOT) and other inflammatory cysts can have the same radiographic features as LPC
F. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.51B)
1. Stratified squamous epithelial lining only a few cells thick; focal epithelial thickening
2. Thin connective tissue wall
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical enucleation of cyst
2. Few cases of recurrence have been reported
3. BOC has greater recurrence potential than LPC


FIG. 8.51(A) Radiograph of a lateral periodontal cyst. This biloculated, well-defined radiolucency is located lateral to the tooth root. (B) Microscopic appearance of a lateral periodontal cyst showing a thin epithelial lining with focal epithelial thickenings. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Odontogenic Keratocyst and Keratocystic Odontogenic Tumor
A. Etiology—odontogenic developmental cyst; multiple cysts may be associated with autosomal dominant disorder: Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome (NBCCS or Gorlin Syndrome) (Fig. 8.52A)19
B. Age and gender—60% between 10 and 40 years of age; slight male predilection
C. Location—most often posterior mandible 80% of the time.
D. Clinical features—may be asymptomatic; does not expand bone; can destroy large amounts of trabecular bone; aggressive behavior with high recurrence rate has led to reclassification as a neoplasm called KCOT; painless swelling or expansion of the jaw if infected
E. Radiographic appearance—well-defined, multilocular, or unilocular radiolucent lesion; can be similar to that of an odontogenic tumor; lesion can move teeth and resorb tooth structure; may resemble the ameloblastoma
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Epithelial lining has a unique histologic appearance
2. Parakeratinized stratified squamous epithelium with corrugated surface lines lumen
3. Uniform 8 to 10 cell thick lining with distinct palisaded basal cell layer
4. Satellite daughter cysts within connective tissue wall (makes complete removal difficult; increases chance of recurrence)
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Aggressive surgical excision and osseous curettage
2. High recurrence rate
3. Close follow-up
4. Evaluation for NBCCS; jaw cysts, congenital skeletal anomalies (bi-fed ribs), calcifications, palmar and plantar pits; and basal cell carcinoma. NBCCS is an autosomal dominant disorder with a male predilection of 3 to 1.


FIG. 8.52(A) Radiograph of a unilocular, dentigerous cyst associated with an impacted third molar. (A) Cyst arising from the dental lamina. Fluid exists between the crown and the reduced enamel epithelium.
A, From Neville B, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC. Oral and Maxillofacial Oral Pathology. Elsevier Inc.; 2024. From Neville B. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. 5th ed. Elsevier Inc.; 2024.
(B) Odontogenic keratocyst. This cyst involves the crown of an unerupted third molar and cannot be differentiated from the dentigerous cyst clinically, but will be verified through histological examination. B, Courtesy: Neville B, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC. Oral and Maxillofacial Oral Pathology. Elsevier Inc.; 2024. From Neville B. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology. 5th ed. Elsevier Inc.; 2024.
Follow for extended description
Primordial Cyst
Initially representing a cyst that develops in the place where a tooth should have developed. Thought, at the present time, to be in conjunction with other cysts, namely the Odontogenic Keratocyst (OKC), as the most “primordial” type of cysts microscopically turn out to be OKCs. The classification of the primordial cyst was recommended in 1992 by the World Health Organization to be listed as an OKC as the preferred term.4 OKCs have a high recurrence rate and possible association with the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome with more aggressive behavior. Removal and aggressive curettage is the usual protocol because of the high rate of recurrence.3


Dentigerous Cyst (Follicular Cyst)
A. Etiology—formed by reduced enamel epithelium after crown of tooth completely formed (unerupted or impacted tooth); accumulation of fluid between the crown and reduced enamel epithelium forms cystic space arises from the dental lamina. It is the most commonly occurring type of developmental odontogenic cyst and noted as the second most commonly occurring odontogenic cyst (after the radicular cyst). Ranked by frequency, the four most common odontogenic cysts are (Fig. 8.52B):
• Radicular cyst—always associated with a nonvital tooth
• Dentigerous cyst—a developmental cyst
• Odontogenic Keratocyst—a developmental cyst
• Lateral periodontal cyst—lateral to a vital mandibular cuspid or premolar tooth
B. Age and gender—young adults 10 to 30 years of age
C. Location
1. Most frequent location is mandibular third molar area—around crown of unerupted third molar; may enlarge to extend high into ramus
2. Maxillary canine region—may compromise the maxillary sinus
D. Clinical features
1. Always in bone and associated with crown of an unerupted or impacted tooth; asymptomatic
2. Can be aggressive lesion, causing expansion of bone and extreme displacement of teeth; large cysts, thin bone mass, and increased risk for pathologic fracture, especially of the mandible
E. Radiographic appearance (see Fig. 8.52B)
1. Smooth, unilocular radiolucency associated with crown of unerupted tooth
2. Radiolucency encircles crown down to cemento-enamel junction (CEJ)
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Stratified squamous epithelial lining; nonkeratinized
2. Surrounded by fibrous connective tissue
3. May see inflammatory infiltrate
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Removal of cyst, and sometimes associated tooth
2. For teeth left in place, orthodontic intervention may be utilized to assist eruption
3. Rare occurrence of ameloblastoma arising in cyst wall
4. Prognosis good but patient should have close follow up; there is the possibility of future tumors, such as the ameloblastoma and mucoepidermoid carcinoma
Injuries to Oral Soft Tissue
Ranula
A. Etiology
1. Trauma to floor of mouth
2. Blockage or obstruction in duct of major salivary gland (sublingual or submandibular) most often by a salivary “stone” (sialolith)
B. Age and gender—any age, but usually adults; no gender predilection
C. Location—unilaterally in floor of mouth
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.53)
1. Term reserved and used for a swelling that occurs in floor of mouth. If the lesion herniates through the mylohyoid muscle, then it is called a “plunging ranula” and appears in the area of the neck.
2. Translucent, bluish, round, smooth-surfaced bulge 1 to 3 cm in diameter
3. Unilateral, semifirm, fluctuant (fluid-filled) mass
4. Increase and decrease in size associated with eating; stimulation of salivary flow
5. Located lateral to midline floor of mouth (helpful for diagnosis)
6. Displacement of tongue may interfere with speech, eating, swallowing
7. Salivary gland tissue in the ventral tongue region known as “glands of Blandin-Nuhn” that may cause enlargements in the anterior ventral tongue. This tissue is composed of mixed mucous and serous glands that are imbedded within the musculature of this location.
E. Radiographic appearance—radiopaque mass present if blockage or obstruction of duct due to sialolith
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Central cystic space which contains mucin and pseudocyst wall composed of loose connective (no epithelial lining so not a true cyst)
2. Inflammatory infiltrate with histiocytes
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical excision
2. Removal of obstruction, if present
3. May recur


FIG. 8.53Ranula. From Odell E. Cawson’s Essentials of Oral Pathology and Oral Medicine. 9th ed. Elsevier; 2017.
Mucocele (Mucous Retention or Extravasation Phenomena Is the Most Preferred Term)
A. Etiology
1. Trauma to a minor salivary gland duct; mucous secretion spills into connective tissue
2. Mechanical trauma by lip biting or chewing common
B. Age and gender—all ages but most common in children and young adults; no gender predilection
C. Location—most common site is lower lip mucosa, but they can occur in areas such as the hard and soft palate, buccal mucosa, retromolar area, and upper lip or lingual frenum
D. Clinical features
1. Blister-like, raised subepithelial, circumscribed fluctuant swelling; 1 to 4 mm in size; painless (unless repeatedly traumatized)
2. Superficial location; bluish translucent hue
3. Often ruptures and releases mucous secretions
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Central cystic space which contains mucin and pseudocyst wall composed of loose connective tissue (not lined with epithelium, so not a true cyst)
2. Inflammatory response present with granulation tissue
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Excision of associated minor salivary gland
2. May rupture, and resolve by itself
3. Recurrence is possible
Necrotizing Sialometaplasia
A. Etiology
1. Trauma results in necrosis of minor salivary glands
2. Believed due to lack of blood supply to the area, vascular ischemia
3. Trauma due to local events, such as dental injection or adjacent infection
B. Age and gender—adults
C. Location—most often found on palate; however, may be found in any site containing minor salivary glands
D. Clinical features (Fig. 8.54)
1. Initial finding of tenderness and swelling in the area
2. Well-demarcated crater-like ulcer with rounded borders
3. Localized pain; can be very painful
4. Resemblance to other neoplasms (especially malignant) may raise concern
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Necrotic salivary gland elements
2. Squamous metaplasia of ductal epithelium
3. Islands of isolated epithelium within connective tissue
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Benign condition, but biopsy to rule out neoplasia and arrive at definitive diagnosis may be needed
2. Self-limiting with return to normal in about 5 to 6 weeks
3. Prognosis good


FIG. 8.54Necrotizing sialometaplasia. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Pseudocysts
Aneurysmal Bone Cyst
A. Etiology—increase in venous pressure causes dilation and rupture of local vascular network; etiologic theories include:
1. Arteriovenous shunt—a benign fibro-osseous lesion in area alters blood vessels
2. Trauma—trauma ruptures blood vessel; blood accumulates outside the vessel wall
3. Although the exact cause is unknown, they are thought to arise secondary to trauma, a vascular malformation, or as a secondary lesion to other bone tumors.
B. Age and gender—under 30 years; no gender predilection
C. Location
1. Long bones or vertebral column
2. In jaws, mandible is the most common site (2:1). There may be bone expansion and destruction.
D. Clinical features
1. May be asymptomatic or appear as a slight to moderately well-defined bulge
2. Tenderness, in long bones pain on motion; may limit movement
3. Intraoral may see mobility or migration of teeth
E. Radiographic appearance—hazy, gray, radiolucent area; appears cystic, with a “soap bubble” or honeycomb effect with well-defined margins; multilocular pattern
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Not a true cyst since no epithelial lining—“pseudocyst”
2. Fibrous connective tissue separates blood-filled compartments
3. Blood-filled spaces with scattered multinucleated giant cells
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical enucleation and thorough curettage (sometimes with cryosurgery—freezing technique to help control bleeding); bone grafting may be combined
2. Surgical appearance is that of a “blood-soaked” sponge
3. Follow-up, on occasion recurs
Simple Bone Cyst (Simple Bone Cavity, Traumatic Bone Cyst)
A. Etiology—theories include:
1. Hemorrhage within bone following trauma; resulting blood clot destroyed leaving empty space
2. Ischemic marrow necrosis
B. Age and gender—ages 10 to 20 years; male predilection
C. Location
1. More common in mandible than maxilla
2. Most common in long bone
D. Clinical features—asymptomatic (discovered during radiographic examination); teeth in area of lesion are vital with no mobility, displacement, or resorption of the roots
Fig. 8.55 shows a traumatic bone cyst in a large area of the mandible; manifesting a scalloped appearance that reaches between the teeth in a honeycomb radiographic appearance.
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Fragments of vascular fibrous connective tissue may be present along walls of empty space
2. Not a true cyst since no epithelial lining—“pseudocyst”
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Surgical intervention, such as curettage, to establish bleeding and clotting is often sufficient to promote healing
2. Area fills in with normal bone in 6 months to 1 year after surgical intervention
3. Prognosis excellent


FIG. 8.55Simple bone cyst. Unilocular, circumscribed cyst in left mandibular molar region encircling the roots of the 1st molar and the mesial root area of the 2nd molar. The cyst was discovered accidentally during a routine exam of a 29-year-old female. Courtesy Dr. Thomas J. Toffoli.
Static Bone Cyst (Lingual Mandibular Bone Concavity, Stafne Bone Cyst)
A. Etiology—developmental (not lined with epithelium and not considered a true cyst); lingual concavity in surface of mandible; accommodates position of salivary gland adjacent to mandible. They are believed to be caused by ectopic salivary gland tissue entrapped during the development of the mandible.
B. Age and gender—young persons; slightly more common in males
C. Location—posterior mandible, anterior to the angle of the ramus, inferior to the mandibular canal
D. Clinical features—asymptomatic; occasionally bilateral; concavity filled with normal salivary gland tissue
E. Radiographic appearance (Fig. 8.56)—sharp, well-defined ovoid radiolucency 1 to 3 cm in diameter, anterior to angle of the ramus, inferior to the mandibular canal
F. Histologic characteristics—lymphoid, fat, normal submaxillary salivary gland tissues; striated muscle (not lined with epithelium, so not a true cyst)
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Rare surgical exploration to determine identity; no treatment necessary
2. Prognosis excellent with periodic monitoring


FIG. 8.56Part of a panoramic radiograph showing a lingual mandibular bone concavity (Stafne bone cyst). Note the well-circumscribed radiolucency inferior to the mandibular canal (arrow). From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Blood Disorders
The fastest growing age group of our population today are centenarians. These individuals live to be over 100 years old. By 2050 the United Nations projects there will be 3.7 million centenarians alive in our world. These numbers will continue to increase. At this point in time, we are even collecting data on what we have termed “super-centenarians’ (those who live to be 112 years old and older). These numbers continue to increase. In 2024 the National Institutes of Health studied these groups of individuals closely. One segment of this study focused on “symptomology,” and this is referenced as the early signs of disease states in individuals and the clinical symptoms of those diseases. As the years progress, the dental community will become even more involved with complex medical cases. Dental professionals will diagnose the very early signs of oral disease that may have resulted from the actual treatment of a patient in prior years. Stress, radiation treatment, and chemotherapy from previous cancer treatments may contribute to cancer later in life, as well as other diseases in the future for the patient. Early recognition of all diseases will allow for early treatment in all patients, and especially those patients who are older. The NIH is focusing on neurotoxicity, cardiotoxicity, and the stressors associated with these damages to the body. As individuals increase in age, they are more prone to blood disorders and changes within the blood of the body. This section addresses some of the various blood disorders that may be seen in many populations.


General Characteristics
A. Benign and malignant diseases with numerous variations
B. Blood chemical studies important in making diagnosis
C. Anemias are categorized according to etiology
1. Blood loss
2. Congenital or developmental condition
3. Decreased production of red blood cells (RBCs)
Sickle Cell Disorder (Sickle Cell Anemia)
A. Etiology—hereditary; genetic disorder involving mutation of beta globin chain of hemoglobin
B. Age and gender—under 30 years; female predilection; 1 in 400 African Americans in the United States affected; also, persons of Mediterranean or Asian origin
C. Clinical features
1. Systemic symptoms
a. Weakness, easily fatigued, pallor of tissues
b. Shortness of breath; nausea, vomiting
c. Pain in joints
d. Sickle cell crisis when oxygen cannot reach tissues, severe systemic complications
e. Delayed growth and development in children
f. Cardiac, kidney, CNS, eyes, and pulmonary involvement
g. Frequent infections due to spleen damage
2. Oral symptoms
a. Delayed tooth eruption in children
b. Pale oral mucosa, oral ulcers and angular cheilitis
c. Osteomyelitis of mandible
D. Radiographic appearance (Fig. 8.57)
1. Perpendicular trabeculations radiating outward, giving “hair-on-end” appearance to skull
2. Decreased trabeculae in the jaws, with large marrow spaces
3. Lamina dura not affected
E. Laboratory tests and findings (Fig. 8.58)
1. Anemia; RBC count reduced to 1 million/mm3 (normal is 4–6 million/mm3)
2. Decrease in the hemoglobin level in RBCs (normal in males, 13.5–18 g/dL; in females, 12–16 g/dL)
3. Blood smear showing sickle-shaped RBCs
F. Histologic characteristics: crescent-shaped erythrocytes, due to abnormal hemoglobin S associated with disorder
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Symptomatic management; oxygen and intravenous fluids
2. Bone marrow transplantation is only cure; only for younger individuals
3. Hydroxyurea—drug treatment reduces painful crises but has several side effects. Oxbryta is sometimes used to reduce low red blood cell count in anemia. Folic acid, Endari, and Adakveo have been used as well. All drugs have side effects, and patients react to medications differently.
4. Prognosis unpredictable, depends on disease severity and activity


FIG. 8.57Sickle cell anemia. The radiograph shows abnormal trabeculation. Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.


FIG. 8.58Normal red blood cells compared with sickled red blood cells. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Pernicious Anemia
A. Etiology
1. Autoimmune disorder in which immune system produces antibodies against parietal cells of stomach
2. Deficiency of intrinsic factor (produced by the parietal cells) necessary to absorb vitamin B12 (cobalamin)
B. Age and gender—older adults; rarely before age 30; no gender predilection
C. Clinical features
1. Systemic symptoms
a. General weakness, dizziness, pallor, anemia (caused by low oxygen in the blood)
b. Numbness or tingling of extremities
c. Gastrointestinal (GI) manifestations—nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain
d. Loss of appetite and weight loss
e. Shortness of breath
f. Neurologic changes—severe paresthesia
2. Oral symptoms
a. Sore, painful, burning tongue; angular cheilitis
b. Shallow ulcers on the mucosa
c. Atrophy filiform papillae of tongue with distorted perception of taste
d. Pallor of the oral mucosa with focal patches of erythema
D. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Diagnosis of pernicious anemia made by laboratory testing; Schilling test is used to determine body’s ability to properly absorb an oral dose of vitamin B12
2. Achlorhydria—lack of gastric hydrochloric acid secretion
3. Megaloblastic anemia—immature, large RBCs
E. Histologic characteristics: macrocytosis of RBCs, megaloblastic anemia
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Injections of vitamin B12
2. Increased dietary intake of folic acid (leafy green vegetables, organ meats, wheat cereals)
3. 1% to 2% of persons with pernicious anemia develop gastric carcinoma
Iron Deficiency Anemia (Plummer-Vinson Syndrome)
A. Etiology—iron deficiency caused by:
1. Inadequate dietary intake of iron
2. Chronic blood loss
3. Decreased iron absorption
4. Increased iron requirements (e.g., infancy, pregnancy)
5. Long-term chronic iron deficiency can lead to Plummer-Vinson Syndrome; characterized by iron deficiency anemia, dysphagia, and glossitis, and increased risk for esophageal and oral cancer
B. Age and gender—ages 40 to 50 years; more common in females (5%–30% female incidence in the United States)
C. Clinical features
1. Systemic symptoms
a. Pallor of skin, weakness; fatigue
b. Difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)
c. Shortness of breath
d. Enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) 20% to 30% of cases
e. Absence of free hydrochloric acid in the stomach
2. Oral symptoms (Fig. 8.59)
a. Angular cheilitis; pallor and atrophy of oral tissues
b. Glossitis with depapillated, smooth, burning, painful tongue
c. Risk for oral candidiasis
d. Predisposition for development of oral cancer
D. Histologic characteristics
1. Altered exfoliated squamous epithelial cells of the tongue and soft tissues
2. Deficiency of keratinized cells
3. Abnormal cell maturation; enlarged nuclei
E. Laboratory findings
1. Complete blood count (CBC) with RBC indices
2. Hypochromatic microcytic RBCs
3. Low number of RBCs
4. Low hemoglobin and hematocrit
5. Plummer-Vinson syndrome—esophagus evaluated for mucosal tissue growths that may inhibit swallowing (“webbing” of esophageal walls). Plummer-Vinson syndrome usually occurs in white women 40 to 60 years of age and can be seen in children. The esophageal webs partially obstruct the esophagus, causing difficulty in swallowing. This condition is rare, and with the improvement in nutrition, it is seen less frequently. This increases the risk of esophageal cancer and squamous carcinoma. Other signs are pale mucous membranes, glossitis, angular cheilitis, and nail abnormalities
F. Treatment
1. Increase iron intake
2. Dietary supplement
3. Possible parenteral (intravenous [IV] or injection) supplementation


FIG. 8.59Iron deficiency anemia. The tongue is devoid of filiform papillae. Angular cheilitis is also present. From Odell E. Cawson’s Essentials of Oral Pathology and Oral Medicine. 9th ed. Elsevier; 2017.
Aplastic Anemia (Primary Aplastic Anemia)
A. Etiology—many cases unknown; severe depression in bone marrow activity; rare, life-threatening disease
B. Age and gender—young adults; no gender predilection
C. Clinical features
1. Oral symptoms
a. Spontaneous bleeding
b. Petechiae
c. Purpuric spots
d. Gingival infection
e. Pallor of oral tissues
2. Systemic symptoms
a. Fatigue, weakness
b. Tachycardia, dizziness
c. Retinal and cerebral hemorrhages in most severe cases
d. Significant bruising
e. Predisposition to infection
D. Laboratory tests and findings establish the diagnosis
1. Reduction in the number of all blood cells (pancytopenia)
2. Reduction in the number of RBCs (anemia)
3. Reduction in the number of WBCs (leukopenia)
4. Reduction in the number of platelets (thrombocytopenia)
5. Bone marrow changes
E. Treatment and prognosis
1. Blood transfusions
2. Antibiotic drugs to control potential infections
3. Bone marrow transplantation
4. Guarded prognosis, depends on severity
5. Serious medical conditions may lead to fatal outcome
Secondary Aplastic Anemia
A. Etiology
1. Result of a drug or chemical substance; chemotherapy
2. Exposure to radiant energy—x-rays, radium, or radioactive isotopes
B. Age and gender—any age; no gender predilection
C. Clinical features—same as in primary aplastic anemia
D. Treatment and prognosis
1. Remove the cause
2. Supportive therapy
3. Prognosis is good
Thalassemia
A. .
1. Etiology—inherited blood disorder caused by multiple gene mutations
2. Disorder of hemoglobin production
3. Ethnic predilection—high incidence in Mediterranean, African countries, and India
B. Age and gender
1. Thalassemia major
a. Affects individuals within the first year of life (homozygous type)
b. More severe type of thalassemia (Cooley Anemia)
2. Thalassemia minor
a. Form appears in later childhood (heterozygous type)
b. Only one gene involved
c. No gender predilection
C. Clinical features
1. Systemic symptoms for thalassemia major
a. Yellow pallor of the skin
b. Enlarged spleen (splenomegaly); enlarged liver (hepatomegaly)
c. Facial features described as “chipmunk facies”
d. Enlargement of the maxilla or mandible and frontal bossing
2. Oral symptoms for thalassemia major
a. Malocclusion; protrusion of the anterior maxillary teeth
b. Pallor of the mucosa
D. Radiographic appearance
1. Peculiar trabecular pattern of the maxilla and the mandible—”salt and pepper” or “hair on end” sign of skull
2. Mild osteoporosis of the jaws
3. Thinning of lamina dura
E. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Elevated WBC count—10,000 to 25,000/mm3
2. Elevated serum bilirubin level
3. Decreased hemoglobin level
F. Histologic characteristics—bone marrow shows cellular hyperplasia
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Blood transfusions (frequently administered)
2. Frequent transfusions cause significant buildup of iron throughout the body (hemochromatosis); these toxic accumulations of iron may be fatal.
3. Bone marrow transplantation
4. Prognosis guarded—periods of remission can extend life span
General Characteristics of Polycythemia
A. Overproduction and increase in number of circulating RBCs
B. Increased hemoglobin level
C. Three forms:
1. Primary polycythemia (polycythemia vera)
2. Secondary polycythemia
3. Relative polycythemia—temporary increase in the number of RBCs; caused by shock, a severe burn, or excessive loss of body fluids
Primary Polycythemia (Polycythemia Vera)
A. Etiology—in most cases not hereditary (not passed down through family) but is due to gene mutation
B. Age and gender—ages 40 to 60 years; more common in males
C. Clinical features
1. Systemic symptoms
a. Headache, dizziness, weakness
b. Enlarged, painful spleen
c. Gastric complaints; peptic ulcers
d. Tips of fingers cyanotic
e. Nosebleeds (epistaxis)
f. Itching of skin (pruritus) without the presence of rash
2. Oral symptoms
a. Oral mucosa deep-red to purple; result of decreased hemoglobin level
b. Gingiva edematous and spongy; bleeds easily
c. Submucosal petechiae; ecchymosis
D. Laboratory tests and findings
1. RBC count elevated to 10 to 12 million cells/mm3 (significant increase)
2. Increase in:
a. Hemoglobin content
b. Blood viscosity
c. WBC counts
d. Hematocrit value
3. Decrease in platelets
E. Treatment and prognosis
1. Medications and procedures to control platelets
2. Intermittent phlebotomy
3. Chemotherapeutic drugs
Secondary Polycythemia
A. Etiology—increased number of RBCs caused by a physiologic response to decreased oxygen
1. Bone marrow anoxia (lack of oxygen) caused by:
a. Pulmonary dysfunction
b. Heart disease
c. High altitudes
d. Carbon monoxide poisoning
2. Stimulatory factors such as drugs or chemicals
B. Characteristics and features similar to those of primary polycythemia vera
Relative Polycythemia
A. Etiology—decreased plasma volume (not an increase in RBCs) that may be caused by:
1. Use of diuretics
2. Vomiting, diarrhea
3. Excessive sweating
B. Age and gender—chronic form of relative polycythemia (also called stress polycythemia) is more common in white, middle-aged men who are stressed, overweight, and hypertensive, and who smoke
C. Treatment—related to cause and risk factors; attempt to remove cause and risk factors
Agranulocytosis
A. Etiology—significant reduction in or absence of circulating neutrophils in the blood (neutropenia)
1. Primary form—unknown; immunologic disorder
2. Secondary form—drug ingestion; chemotherapy; toxic effect of drugs or chemicals
B. Age and gender—any age; more common adults; female predilection in secondary form
C. Clinical features
1. Systemic symptoms
a. Sudden onset
b. High fever, chills, sore throat
c. Malaise, weakness
d. Skin is jaundiced
e. Regional lymphadenopathy
2. Oral symptoms
a. Infection (clinical signs affecting gingiva can be similar to NUG)
b. Ulcerations of the pharynx, palate, buccal mucosa, and tongue
D. Laboratory tests and findings—needed to confirm diagnosis
1. Severe decrease in or absence of granulocytes or PMNs
2. Accelerated destruction of neutrophils; bone marrow has few or no granulocytes
3. WBC count is reduced to less than 1000 cells/mm3
E. Histologic characteristics
1. Necrosis of involved tissues
2. Increased bacterial microorganisms
F. Treatment
1. Removal of causative drug or agent, if possible
2. Administration of antibiotics to prevent or control infection
Cyclic Neutropenia
A. Etiology—inherited; autosomal dominant; mutation of the neutrophil elastase (ELA2) gene
B. Age and gender related—most frequent infants and young children; no gender predilection
C. Clinical features: regular periodic episodes lasting 3 to 4 days correlating with significant decrease in circulating neutrophils
1. Systemic symptoms
a. General weakness, malaise
b. Recurrent fever, sore throat, headache
c. Cervical lymphadenopathy
d. GI mucosal ulcerations
2. Oral symptoms (Fig. 8.60)
a. Severe gingivitis, recession, periodontitis
b. Painful chronic ulcerations on oral mucosa especially gingiva, keratinized mucosa severely affected
c. Mild to severe loss of alveolar bone
D. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Neutrophils may completely disappear in acute stage
2. Cycles occur at intervals of 21 to 27 days
3. Sequential blood counts several times a week for several weeks help determine neutrophil cycle
E. Treatment and prognosis
1. Maintain optimal oral hygiene
2. Perform dental treatment during cycle when circulating neutrophils are normal; this reduces potential for complications and secondary infections
3. Antibiotics to control significant infections
4. Premedication with antibiotics before dental hygiene or surgical procedures may be needed
5. Possible treatment with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)


FIG. 8.60Marked gingivitis, with areas of gingival recession in a patient with cyclic neutropenia. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Leukemia
General Characteristics
A. Malignant neoplastic disorder involving blood-forming cells; originates in bone marrow
B. Excessive proliferation of malignant immature WBCs
C. Etiology—combination of genetic and environmental factors; oncogenic viruses
1. Chronic exposure to chemicals or ionizing radiation
2. Higher incidence among persons with genetic disorders, including Down syndrome and other chromosomal abnormalities, neurofibromatosis, and Klinefelter syndrome (see the section on “Genetics” in Chapter 7)
D. Several types and subtypes of this condition exist
Acute Leukemia
A. Two types:
1. Acute myeloid (myelogenous) leukemia (AML)
2. Acute lymphocytic (lymphoblastic) leukemia (ALL)
B. Age and gender
1. AML generally affects adults but can affect children
2. ALL almost always affects children; second peak in old age
C. Clinical features—onset is sudden, rapidly progressing
1. Systemic symptoms
a. Frequent infections
b. Weakness, fever, headache
c. Pale skin
d. Easy bruising of the skin and mucous membranes
e. Unusual bleeding, nosebleeds
f. Enlargement of organs—spleen, liver
g. Bone and joint pain
2. Oral symptoms (Fig. 8.61)
a. Purpuric spots, petechiae
b. Marked gingival enlargement—red, soft, spongy with spontaneous bleeding
c. Gingiva sometimes similar to NUG—characterized by ulcerations, blunted papillae, necrosis, odor
d. Pallor of tissues; nonulcerated edema
e. Candidiasis, herpetic infection, or both
f. Toothache caused by invasion and necrosis of pulp
g. Mobility of teeth due to breakdown of periodontal ligament, supporting bone
D. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Both anemia and thrombocytopenia present
2. Prolonged bleeding and coagulation times; caused by decrease in the number of platelets (thrombocytopenia)
3. WBC count elevated to 100,000/mm3 (many immature cells)
4. Leukemic cells in bone marrow and peripheral blood
5. Tests to identify certain enzymes can help classify leukemia type
E. Treatment and prognosis
1. Chemotherapy depending on type and form of leukemia
2. Antibiotics to control infection
3. Bone marrow or stem cell transplant
4. Transfusions with platelets or packed RBCs
5. Maintain optimal oral hygiene
6. Prognosis depends on multiple factors (e.g., type of leukemia, age at onset)


FIG. 8.61Generalized gingival hyperplasia in a patient with leukemia. Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Chronic Leukemia
A. Common forms
1. Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)—associated with the Philadelphia chromosome (abnormality of chromosome 22)
2. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)—the most common leukemia in adults; asymptomatic for a long time
B. Age and gender—chronic leukemia affects older adults; no gender predilection
C. Clinical features—slow-growing with slow progression
1. Systemic symptoms
a. Very slow onset—disease may be present for weeks to years before symptoms appear and lead to diagnosis
b. Weight loss, fatigue
c. Lymph node enlargement and enlarged spleen in the CLL type, not in the CML type
d. Petechiae on the skin with nodules of leukemic cells
e. Destructive bone lesions—result in bone fracture
2. Oral symptoms
a. Gingival tissues are severely affected; become tender, enlarged, bleed easily
b. Pallor of gingiva and lips
c. Purpuric spots; ecchymosis (large areas of pooled blood are purpura and ecchymosis). Petechia (smaller spots) may exist as well
d. Cervical lymphadenopathy may be an early sign (underlines importance of lymph node examination)
e. Oral candidiasis
D. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Anemia and thrombocytopenia sometimes present
2. WBC count can increase to 500,000/mm3 (95% of the total number of blood cells)
3. Shift to the left in the maturity of cells
4. Differential count of cell type involved elevated
E. Treatment and prognosis
1. Chemotherapy
2. Bone marrow transplantation (especially for patients with CML—better survival rates)
3. Prognosis depends on the stage of the disease; chronic leukemia—2- to 10-year survival depending on stage
Purpura
General Characteristics
Purpura, Ecchymoses, and Petechiae are hemorrhages in the soft tissue due to trauma or blood dyscrasias. Any age may be affected, and there is an equal distribution for males and females. It can occur in all age groups. When diascopy is used, the lesions do not blanch since this is blood that has pooled within the tissue. Diascopy may be performed using a glass slide. This procedure allows the clinician to determine if the area is a hemorrhage or a vascular element. Pressure placed on the area will stop the flow of blood in a vascular lesion.7,8 Ecchymoses is a larger area of pooled blood followed by purpura and then petechiae. Sometimes the cause of these hemorrhages may be iatrogenic in nature caused by dental procedures. Some hemorrhages may be associated with blood dyscrasias.


A. Purplish discoloration of the skin and mucous membranes caused by spontaneous escape of blood into tissues
B. Caused by:
1. Defect or deficiency in blood platelets (thrombocytopenic purpura)
2. Unexplained increase in capillary fragility (vascular or nonthrombocytopenic purpura)
Thrombocytopenic Purpura
A. Etiology
1. Primary (idiopathic or immune) thrombocytopenic purpura; cause is unknown
2. Secondary thrombocytopenic purpura—immune mediated
a. Drug toxicity
b. Chemotherapy
c. Infectious diseases
B. Age and gender—primary form occurs in childhood before age 10 years; secondary form may appear at any age; no gender predilection
C. Clinical features
1. Systemic symptoms
a. Spontaneous hemorrhagic skin lesions that vary in size (petechiae, ecchymosis, hematomas)
b. Patient bruises easily
c. Bleeding through the urinary tract (hematuria)
d. Bleeding from the nose (epistaxis)
e. Spleen not palpable
2. Oral symptoms
a. Profuse gingival hemorrhage
b. Clustered petechiae
D. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Abnormal platelet count; severe reduction in the platelet count—below 50,000/mm3 (normal, 150,000–400,000/mm3)
2. Bleeding time prolonged to up to 1 hour or more
3. Positive capillary fragility test
E. Treatment
1. Discontinue causative drug, if known
2. Corticosteroid therapy
3. Blood transfusions (platelets, in particular)
4. Guarded prognosis
5. Consult patient’s physician prior to any dental or surgical procedure
Hemophilia
A. Etiology—genetic deficiency of clotting factors in the blood; von Willebrand factor, or clotting factors VIII or IX
1. Von Willebrand disease; autosomal dominant; affects both males and females
2. Type A hemophilia associated with factor VIII; sex-linked recessive (on X chromosome); occurs almost exclusively in males
3. Type B hemophilia associated with factor IX; sex-linked recessive (on X chromosome); occurs almost exclusively in males
4. Types A and B hemophilia are usually transmitted genetically from asymptomatic carrier mothers to sons; spontaneous gene mutations also occur in up to one-third of cases.
B. Age and gender—usually present at birth; symptoms may not appear until later; males are most susceptible, whereas females are carriers of the trait
C. Clinical features
1. Systemic symptoms
a. Prolonged clotting time; persistent bleeding
b. Massive hematomas; hemorrhage
c. Three forms—differ in the deficiency of a blood clotting factor
(1) Type A—(factor VIII) may be mild, moderate, or severe depending on amount of clotting factor in blood; most common type of hemophilia
(2) Type B—(factor IX) also known as Christmas disease; may be mild, moderate, or severe depending on amount of clotting factor in blood; second most common type of hemophilia
(3) Von Willebrand disease—(abnormal von Willebrand’s factor) most common inherited bleeding disorder in the United States; mild cases may go undetected
2. Oral symptoms
a. Spontaneous gingival bleeding
b. Prolonged bleeding following tooth eruption, exfoliation, scaling, extraction, or surgery
D. Laboratory tests and findings—prothrombin time (PT), factor assays to identify factor deficiency
E. Treatment
1. Main treatment is replacement therapy; injections or infusions of concentrates of missing clotting factor
2. Nonhuman recombinant clotting factor concentrates may be used
3. Genetic counseling
4. Maintain optimal dental and dental hygiene care
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
A. Etiology—HIV is an RNA retrovirus that infects and destroys CD4+ T-lymphocytes, resulting in immune deficiency; AIDS is a set of symptoms caused by HIV infection; this is the last stage of HIV infection or late-stage advanced HIV
B. Age—any age; virus can be transmitted to anyone
C. Gender and ethnic characteristics
1. Male predilection
2. Homosexual or bisexual men
3. Overall increased incidence among IV drug users
4. Others at risk include sex workers, prison inmates, and children of infected mothers
D. Transmission
1. Sexual contact
2. Infected blood or serum; virus has been found in blood and bodily fluids, including saliva and tears of infected individuals
3. Infected mothers can transmit virus to newborns via breast milk
4. Artificial insemination
5. IV drug users
6. Cofactors (e.g., other infections) may influence ability of transmission
E. Clinical features—oral lesions (Box 8.1)
1. Oral findings missing or can be subtle at earliest stage of HIV infection
2. Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL) may be only initial sign of HIV infection; PGL warns of progression to AIDS (one-third have diagnostic features of AIDS within 5 years)
3. Oral candidiasis occurs in >85% of cases; this is most common intraoral manifestation of HIV and often the presenting sign that leads to initial diagnosis
4. Persistence of active sites of herpes simplex infection for more than 1 month; severe infections with herpes zoster and human papillomavirus (HPV)
5. Major or herpetiform aphthous ulcers
6. Severe NUG; linear gingival erythema (clinical features similar to marginal gingivitis); highly resistant to oral hygiene care
7. Necrotizing ulcerative periodontitis (NUP); gingival necrosis accompanied by rapid severe bone loss; not responsive to conventional periodontal therapy
8. Hairy leukoplakia (HL); due to Epstein-Barr virus; HL in HIV-infected patient is a strong indicator that AIDS will develop within 2 years
9. Kaposi sarcoma; considered vascular malignancy; occurs in 15% to 20% of AIDS patients; oral lesions present in 50%; especially hard palate and gingiva
10. HIV-salivary gland disease; parotid enlargement bilaterally; more common in children; may be seen in up to 5% of HIV+ patients
F. Clinical features—general
1. Initially may mimic infectious mononucleosis with lymphadenopathy, fatigue, headache, fever, sore throat
2. Prone to develop multiple opportunistic infections—candidiasis, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, herpes zoster, pneumocystis pneumonia (highly suggestive of AIDS and often leads to initial diagnosis)
3. Certain cancers develop more frequently—SCC, Kaposi sarcoma, and non-Hodgkin lymphoma
4. Constitutional signs include sudden, unexplained weight loss, persistent lymphadenopathy involving cervical, and submandibular nodes
Box 8.1
Oral Lesions Associated With Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection


Candidiasis
Herpes simplex infection
Herpes zoster
Hairy leukoplakia
Human papillomavirus lesions
Atypical gingivitis and periodontitis
Other opportunistic infections reported
Mycobacterium avium
Cytomegalovirus
Cryptococcus neoformans
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Enterobacter cloacae
Histoplasma capsulatum
Kaposi sarcoma
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Aphthous ulcers
Mucosal pigmentation
Bilateral salivary gland enlargement and xerostomia
Spontaneous gingival bleeding resulting from thrombocytopenia
From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier; 2014.


HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS
A. Etiology—Human papillomavirus (HPV) has been recognized for decades as a key player in cervical cancers (see Fig. 8.89A and B). HPV is a double-stranded DNA virus and is a common sexually transmitted infection. It has a global prevalence of around 11.7%, with more than 80% of the global population being infected at some point in their lifetime with the virus. The two most common HPV types affecting the oropharyngeal and oral tissues are HVP 16 and 18. There is a small percentage, 3% to 5%, of oral squamous cell carcinomas arising from oral potentially malignant disorders (OPMD) through genetic alterations. Currently, there have been approximately 200 HPV types of the virus identified. Some are low-risk and others are high-risk types1,7,9
B. Age—HPV may be transmitted in any age group, but most are transmitted through sexual intercourse and skin-to-skin contact in an older age group such as 30 to 50 years old. We have seen a younger age group developing oropharyngeal cancer in the past few decades. The patients are often nonsmokers and do not consume alcohol
C. Gender and ethnic characteristics—Worldwide, 5% of all cancers are caused by HPV. HPV 16 and HPV18 account for most of the HPV cancer types. The risk for males is higher than for females. In adults 18 to 69 years old, there is a global prevalence of 7.7% with increased numbers in men 9.3%. Patients from South America (poor socioeconomic areas) and people with increased numbers of partners have a 12.4% higher risk, and patients with immunosuppression have a higher risk of 12.5%. Men are twice as likely to develop head and neck cancers. The cure rate after treatment is approximately 85% to 90% depending on the stage at diagnosis. https://www.headandneck.org/symptoms/
D. Treatment is dependent on the type of HPV. The higher risk type lesions and stage at discovery often involve surgery, radiation treatment, and chemotherapy. These procedures are often needed in advanced cases to control the infection. Antiviral medications can shorten the duration of visible lesions of various types; but long-term, vaccines provide the most effective treatment when utilized before infection. Most HPV infections are benign, low-risk lesions of squamous epithelium including warts, laryngeal papilloma, and condyloma acuminata. The optimal protection from HPV is the vaccine available in the United States, Gardasil-9 (9vHPV), and it is distributed with other types of vaccines available globally. This vaccine protects against nine HPV types (6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 45, 52, and 58). The CDC recommends talking with your physician.
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/hpv/public/
Currently, the CDC recommends that 11- to 12-year-olds receive two doses of HPV vaccine 6 to 12 months apart. If given after age 15, three doses are needed. Up to age 45 may be suggested in some adults
E. Transmission—The most common route of transmission is through sexual intercourse and through direct contact. Known risk factors include oral sex, exposure at a young age, the number of lifetime partners, tobacco and marijuana smoking, immunosuppression, and skin-to-skin contact, such as deep kissing. There is a reported higher rate of transmission in individuals who have had more than 5 to 7 sexual partners in the past. Most patients who are exposed to the HPV virus clear the virus within 1 to 2 years. There have been multiple studies assessing the correlation of OLP, OL, and other mucosal diseases of a cell-mediated nature with limited results
F. Clinical Features—Oral lesions may occur in the tonsillar bed, the lateral border of the tongue, and the oropharyngeal tissue. The buccal mucosa is a reported area, close to Stenson’s duct. The virus has an affinity for the salivary duct tissue. The lesions may vary in appearance and exhibit an exophytic surface with a cauliflower-like lesion. These lesions may be painless, exophytic, pedunculated, or sessile in structure. The degree of infectivity is related to the type of HPV. They are transmittable
G. Histology
1. Koilocytosis—presence of koilocytes, which are squamous epithelial cells with perinuclear halos indicative of HPV effect
2. Acanthosis—thickening of the spinous layer (stratum spinosum) of the epithelium
Papillomatosis—a pronounced projection of the epithelial surface, creating the finger-like projections seen clinically
3. Hyperkeratosis—increased keratin production leading to a thicker outer layer of the epithelium
H. Reported symptoms
• Oral cavity—a white or red patch on the gums, the tongue, or the lining of the mouth; a swelling of the jaw that causes dentures to fit poorly or become uncomfortable; and unusual bleeding or pain in the mouth. The following are specific complaints related to locations within the head and neck region. https://www.headandneck.org/symptoms/
• Pharynx—trouble breathing or speaking; pain when swallowing; pain in the neck or the throat that does not go away; frequent headaches; pain or ringing in the ears; or trouble hearing
• Larynx—pain when swallowing or ear pain
• Paranasal sinuses and nasal cavity—sinuses that are blocked and do not clear; chronic sinus infections that do not respond to treatment with antibiotics; bleeding through the nose; frequent headaches, swelling, or other trouble with the eyes; pain in the upper teeth; or problems with dentures not fitting
• Salivary glands—swelling under the chin or around the jawbone, numbness or paralysis of the muscles in the face, or pain in the face, the chin, or the neck that does not go away
• Reported Symptoms—patients with HPV have reported a lump in the neck or submandibular area, Lumps or sores in the oral tissues, difficulty swallowing, bleeding in the nose, mouth or throat, numbness, or pain in the head and neck areas. https://www.headandneck.org/hpv-head-neck-cancer
I. Infections related to Epithelial diseases associated with HPV. The epithelial diseases include:
Verruca vulgaris (common wart), Focal epithelial hyperplasia, Condyloma acuminatum, Squamous papilloma, Verrucous carcinoma, Keratoacanthoma.


Histological Features—HPV belongs to a family of small viruses with a specific affinity for epithelial tissues. The prevalent sites include the vaginal epithelium, penis, anal canal, vulva, cervix, perianal region, and crypts of the tonsils and the oropharynx. In high-risk types, the viral DNA is integrated into the host cells.


Human Papillomavirus Risk Types
The higher-risk types—the papillomavirus has been linked with cancers in both men and women: HPVs 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 42, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66, 68, and 73.


The lower-risk types—cause cervical changes, genital warts, and respiratory papilloma. There are 100+ reported types, and 60 HPV types cause warts on the skin surface: HPVs 2, 6, 11, 13, 32, 40, 43, 44, 53, 54, 55, 57, 61, 62, 64, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, and 81.


Bone Dysplasias
General Characteristics
A. Etiology—developmental disorder; due to a defective gene in cells that form bone, not inherited; replacement of bone with fibrous connective tissue
B. Bone enlargement and deformity, fractures, pain
C. Monostotic form affects one bone; polyostotic form affects multiple bones
D. Benign noncancerous disorder, malignant transformation rare
Monostotic Fibrous Dysplasia
A. Etiology—noninherited developmental disorder due to defective gene in bone-forming cells
B. Age and gender—early teen and adolescent years during periods of bone growth; often becomes inactive after puberty; boys more often than girls
C. Location
1. Ribs—most common site
2. Craniofacial bones, typically posterior maxilla
D. Clinical features
1. Affects one bone (∼70% of cases of fibrous dysplasia)
2. Painless swelling, enlargement or expansion of jaw: buccal plate of maxilla or mandible
3. Result may be malocclusion, tipping, or displacement of teeth
4. Lesions in maxilla may not be clearly outlined due to extension into sinus or floor of orbit
E. Radiographic features
1. Lesion blends into surrounding bone
2. Diffuse radiopacity; “ground glass” appearance
3. Sometimes radiolucency with areas of radiopacity (depending on the degree of calcification)
F. Histologic characteristics
1. Fibrous tissue with irregularly shaped islands of woven bone
2. Irregularly shaped trabeculae give characteristic “Chinese character” or “alphabet soup” appearance
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Manage pain and stabilize bones
2. Surgical correction of deformed bone; generally postponed until after puberty
3. Radiation therapy contraindicated due to potential for malignant transformation
Polyostotic Fibrous Dysplasia
A. Etiology—noninherited developmental disorder due to defective gene in bone-forming cells
B. Age and gender—younger age group than monostotic form; female predilection for McCune-Albright type
C. Location
1. Sometimes more than half of bones in skeletal system involved
2. Bones of the face and skull, thigh bone, upper arm, pelvis, ribs
3. Long bones affected more often than craniofacial bones
4. Unilateral (occurring on one side of body), when multiple bones affected
D. Clinical features (depend on type of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia)
1. Affects multiple bones (∼30% of cases of fibrous dysplasia); disease may remain active throughout life
2. Bone fractures, skin lesions; café au lait pigmentation
3. Oral manifestations:
a. Expansion and deformity of jaws; unilateral enlargement of maxilla or mandible
b. Disturbed tooth eruption pattern caused by endocrine dysfunction
4. Types of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
a. Craniofacial fibrous dysplasia—craniofacial involvement; maxilla often involved; lesion may extend into sinus and surrounding bones
b. Jaffe-Lichtenstein syndrome—lesions arise in multiple bones; café au lait skin lesions on skin of trunk and upper legs
c. McCune-Albright syndrome—most severe form of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
(1) Multiple bones involved (polyostotic)
(2) Café au lait skin lesions
(3) Severe endocrine abnormalities: precocious (early before age 3) puberty; more common in girls than boys
E. Radiographic appearance—lesions blend into surrounding bone; diffuse radiopacity; “ground glass” appearance, sometimes radiolucency with areas of radiopacity
F. Laboratory tests and diagnostic tools
1. Radiographs are the primary tool to diagnose fibrous dysplasia.
2. Imaging tests, bone scan, possible bone biopsy
G. Histologic characteristics
1. Fibrous tissue with irregularly shaped islands of woven bone
2. Irregularly shaped trabeculae give characteristic “Chinese character” or “alphabet soup” appearance
H. Treatment and prognosis
1. Some cases treated with drugs such as bisphosphonates to prevent bone loss
2. Surgical correction to treat deformity or fracture
3. Radiation treatment contraindicated because of association with malignant transformation
Cherubism
A. Etiology—inherited; autosomal dominant; defect in SH3BP2 gene
B. Age and gender—onset as early as 1 year or early childhood (by age 5); males affected over females 2:1
C. Location—maxilla and the mandible
D. Clinical features
1. Painless bilateral facial swelling or enlargement of jaws; firm and hard on palpation
2. Involvement of four quadrants produces chubby cheeks and “cherubic” appearance
3. Condition affects orbital areas creating upturned eyes (“eyes upturned to heaven” appearance)
4. Regional lymphadenopathy, dental malocclusion
5. Early exfoliation of primary dentition
6. Agenesis of permanent second and third molars; lack of or delayed tooth eruption
7. Speech and swallowing problems
E. Radiographic appearance
1. Bilateral multilocular radiolucencies; “soap bubble” appearance
2. Thinning of cortical plates, numerous unerupted or displaced teeth in cyst-like radiolucent spaces
3. Root resorption
F. Laboratory tests and findings—analysis for gene mutation provides definitive diagnosis
G. Histologic characteristics
1. Similar to central giant cell granuloma and hyperparathyroidism; fibrous tissue proliferation
2. Numerous large, multinucleated giant cells in a loose, delicate, fibrous connective tissue stroma
H. Treatment and prognosis
1. Self-limiting; remission at puberty
2. Surgical intervention for severe cases
3. Radiation contraindicated due to risk of sarcoma
4. Prognosis is good
Periapical Cemento-Osseous Dysplasia (Cementoma)
A. Etiology—unknown; benign fibro-osseous lesion, nonneoplastic type of cemento-osseous dysplasia, believed to be reactive
B. Age and gender—middle age; more common in females (15:1) and African Americans (70%)
C. Location
1. Anterior mandible; rare in the maxilla
2. Apices of teeth; surrounding or adjacent to roots
D. Clinical features
1. Asymptomatic and localized; teeth in the affected area are vital (this feature is critical to diagnosis)
2. Pulp testing must be part of the diagnostic process
3. Lesions progress over time through three radiographic stages
4. Early stage may be mistaken for periapical pathology, presenting diagnostic challenge
E. Radiographic appearance—depends on stage of lesion development
1. Early stage (osteolytic stage)—radiolucent lesion cannot be differentiated from other apical pathology
2. Middle stage (osteoblastic stage)—mixed radiolucent/radiopaque lesions; indicates calcification of connective tissue
3. Mature or end-stage—lesion uniformly radiopaque with a radiolucent rim; periodontal ligament remains intact
F. Histologic characteristics, depend on stage of lesion
1. Fibroblast-like cells and collagen with varying amounts of interspersed trabeculae of bone and cementum-like material
2. Normal bone replaced with abnormal bone/cementum matrix
G. Treatment and prognosis
1. Self-limiting; no treatment necessary
2. Prognosis is good
Paget Disease (Osteitis Deformans)
A. Etiology—unknown; nonneoplastic disease of bone theories include:
1. Viral cause
2. Inflammatory response
3. Endocrine imbalance
B. Age and gender—most often over 40 years of age; more frequent in Caucasian males
C. Location—may be localized to a few bones or widespread to multiple bones; common sites affected include pelvis, spine, leg, skull
D. Clinical features
1. Systemic signs and symptoms
a. Develop slowly over time
b. Enlargement of bones (bowing of long bones)—spine, femur, tibia, skull (frontal bossing can lead to change in hat size)
c. Most common symptom is bone pain
d. Deformities, tingling and numbness in arms or legs, pathologic fractures
e. Severe headaches, hearing loss
2. Oral signs and symptoms
a. Enlargement of jaws and dental arches, may lead to increased spacing between teeth
b. Edentulous patients may complain their dentures no longer fit
c. Hypercementosis of teeth, can complicate tooth extractions
E. Radiographic appearance
1. Initial decreased radiodensity
2. Irregular radiolucent and radiopaque patches, giving classic “cotton wool” or “cotton ball” appearance
3. Root resorption; hypercementosis; loss of lamina dura
F. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Bone scans and skeletal survey, characteristic appearance on radiographs
2. Elevated level of alkaline phosphatase (significant to the diagnosis)
3. Normal calcium phosphate and aminotransferase; markers of bone turnover
G. Histologic characteristics—characterized by both bone resorption and bone deposition
1. Areas of resorption—osteoclast activity
2. Areas of deposition—osteoblast activity
3. Areas of both resorption and deposition—osteoclasts and osteoblasts present
4. Vascular fibrous connective tissue replaces bone marrow
5. Reversal lines in bone—”mosaic bone”
H. Treatment and prognosis
1. No treatment if asymptomatic
2. Treatment aimed at controlling disease; there is no cure
3. Bone pain—analgesics
4. Systemic medications: calcitonin, bisphosphonates
5. Diet and exercise
6. Rare complication is osteogenic sarcoma
Endocrine Disorders
General Characteristics
A. Associated with group of organs controlling metabolism, growth, other tissue functions
B. Occur as a result of hormone excess or deficiency
Hyperparathyroidism
A. Etiology—excess secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) by parathyroid gland
1. Primary hyperparathyroidism—excessive PTH results from benign or malignant parathyroid pathology
B. Secondary hyperparathyroidism—accompanies other systemic diseases; most common cause is chronic renal failure
C. Age and gender—most often over 60 years of age; female predilection (3:1)
D. Clinical features
1. Systemic signs and symptoms
a. Classic signs and symptoms of primary hyperparathyroidism are referred to as “stones, bones, and abdominal groans”
b. Stones refers to kidney stones; caused by increased calcium in urine
c. Bones refers to bone-related pathology; pain, joint stiffness, and resorption of bone with spontaneous fractures
d. Groans refers to discomfort due to GI problems such as ulcers, indigestion, constipation
2. Oral signs and symptoms
a. Jaw swelling due to “brown tumors” of hyperparathyroidism; these resolve without treatment once disorder is under control (brown tumors similar to central giant cell granuloma)
b. Bone loss may result in malocclusion, shifting, or mobility of teeth
E. Radiographic appearance (Fig. 8.62A)
1. Loss of bone density results in “ground glass” appearance
2. Unilocular or multilocular cyst-like radiolucency in posterior jaws
3. Loss of lamina dura
F. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Blood tests: elevated PTH and calcium levels in blood
2. Skeletal assessment with bone density testing
3. Kidney function assessment
G. Histologic characteristics (Fig. 8.62B)
1. Osteoclastic activity increased; osteoclasts observed tunneling into bone matrix
2. Increased bone formation and peritrabecular fibrosis
3. “Brown” tumor histologically indistinguishable from central giant cell granuloma
H. Treatment
1. Correct the cause of increased PTH production (tumors, renal disease, vitamin D deficiency)
2. Surgical removal or parathyroidectomy is cure for primary hyperparathyroidism
3. “Brown” tumor resolves without treatment once hyperparathyroidism is controlled


FIG. 8.62(A) Radiograph of a mandibular lesion in a patient with hyperparathyroidism. (B) Microscopic appearance of a jaw lesion occurring in a patient with hyperparathyroidism. The histologic appearance is identical to that of a central giant cell granuloma. A, Courtesy Drs. Paul Freedman and Stanley Kerpel. A and B, From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Osteomalacia
A. Etiology—most often due to severe vitamin D deficiency or impaired absorption of vitamin D (vitamin D deficiency in adults called osteomalacia; in children it is called rickets)
B. Age and gender—osteomalacia occurs in adults; female predilection; often happens during pregnancy
C. Clinical features
1. Osteomalacia means “soft bones”; loss of mineralization or hardening
a. Easily broken bones
b. Bone pain and tenderness
c. Affects gait, side-to-side or waddling stride when walking
2. Polyuria (urine output greatly increased) and polydipsia (severe thirst) complication of hypercalcemia
3. Oral manifestations may include alveolar ridge resorption and periodontal bone loss
D. Radiographic appearance
1. Generalized demineralization of bone; symmetric stripes in hypocalcified long bones, pelvis, and scapula indicate pseudofractures
2. Lamina dura of teeth may be absent
3. Radiopaque stones in kidney
E. Laboratory tests and findings
1. Blood and urine tests to detect low levels of vitamin D, calcium, phosphorus problems
2. Radiographs, bone biopsy
F. Treatment and prognosis
1. Increased dosage of vitamin D; if malabsorption, water-soluble, synthetic vitamin D can be given
2. Calcium supplements
3. Treatment of bone fractures (persons with osteomalacia are prone to pathologic fractures)
Rickets
A. Etiology
1. Due to severe vitamin D deficiency or impaired absorption of vitamin D (called rickets in children, osteomalacia in adults)
2. Failure of cartilage and bone to calcify
B. Age—children, most common in first year of life
C. Clinical features
1. Systemic signs and symptoms
a. Delayed growth, spine deformity
b. Muscle weakness, bowed legs or knock knees
c. Protrusion of sternum, “pigeon breast” deformity
d. Prominence of costochondral junctions, “rachitic rosary”
2. Oral signs and symptoms
a. Dentin defects, enamel pits and hypoplasia
b. Large pulp chambers, short roots
c. Hypoplastic alveolar ridge, poorly defined lamina dura
D. Treatment—vitamin D and calcium supplements, other medications and supplements may be indicated; more severe skeletal deformities may require surgical correction
Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis
General Characteristics
A. Etiology—unknown; not inherited, mutations in BRAF gene in about half of cases
B. Age and gender—disorder that primarily affects children but also all ages
C. Langerhans cells multiply and accumulate in large collections called granulomas
D. Includes a group of three disease states characterized by proliferation of Langerhans cells; a combination of histiocytic cells and eosinophils containing “Birbeck Granules.” The cytoplasmic structures are diagnostic in identifying Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis3
E. Three variants:
1. Letterer-Siwe disease (severe, acute disseminated form)
a. Age and gender—first 3 years of life; infants
b. Clinical features
(1) Skin rash on the trunk, scalp, and extremities
(2) Persistent low-grade fever; malaise, irritability
(3) Splenomegaly, hepatomegaly
(4) Anemia
(5) Oral lesions—not common
(6) Most severe form of Langerhans cell histiocytosis cutaneous, visceral and bone marrow involvement
c. Prognosis—poor, early high mortality rate; sometimes responds to chemotherapy
2. Hand-Schüller-Christian disease (intermediate chronic form)
a. Age and gender—mainly children less than 15 years of age
b. Clinical features
(1) Systemic signs and symptoms—classic triad in up to 30%:
(a) Skull and jaws affected—lytic punched-out radiolucencies
(b) Diabetes insipidus—result of pituitary dysfunction
(c) Exophthalmos—bulging of eyes caused by orbital masses of proliferating immature histiocytes and eosinophils
(2) Oral signs and symptoms
a) Sore mouth, ulcerations, erythema. Ulcerative or proliferative lesions or masses may occur if the disease breaks out of the bone.
b) Halitosis, unpleasant taste, gingivitis
c) Loose, sensitive teeth
d) Failure to heal after extractions
c. Radiographic appearance—punched-out radiolucency in the skull and jaws; teeth appear to be “floating” in bone, which has been destroyed around them
d. Treatment and prognosis
(1) Curettage of lesions
(2) Radiation therapy
(3) Cytotoxic drugs and adrenocortical hormones
(4) Prognosis is poor; high fatality rate
3. Eosinophilic granuloma (localized less severe form)
a. Age and gender—older children and adults; male predilection (2:1)
b. Clinical features
(1) Most common variant of Langerhans cell histiocytosis
(2) Localized bone destruction; single or multiple lytic skeletal lesions; most often multiple
(3) Any bone can be involved, but skull, mandible, spine, and long bones are frequently involved
(4) Can mimic aggressive periodontitis not responding to periodontal therapy
(5) May see severe ulcerative mucositis
c. Radiographic appearance—lesions are lytic radiolucencies, single or multiple; well defined, resembling a cyst (Fig. 8.63)
d. Treatment and prognosis
(1) Curettage and conservative surgical excision
(2) Radiation therapy
(3) Local injections of corticosteroids
(4) Prognosis is good; recurrence rare


FIG. 8.63Radiograph of eosinophilic granuloma. Courtesy Drs. Paul Freedman and Stanley Kerpel. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Defects of Tooth Structure
Attrition
A. Etiology—wearing away of tooth surfaces by active, physiologic forces
1. Mastication, “tooth to tooth” contact
2. Bruxism, other parafunctional habits such as clenching
3. Occlusion—heavy biting forces
4. Diet—chewing of coarse foods or tobacco accelerates wear
B. Age and gender—occurs in both primary and permanent dentition
C. Clinical features (Fig. 8.64A and B)
1. Occurs almost exclusively on occlusal and incisal surfaces
2. Interproximal tooth contacts can also show attrition
3. Polished facets, flat incisal edges
4. Gradual process over long time, exposed dentin, but pulp exposure rare
5. Result is shortening of clinical crowns


FIG. 8.64(A) Attrition. (B) Incisal view of attrition of the adult dentition. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Abrasion
A. Etiology—wearing away of tooth structure by external force
1. Improper toothbrushing technique; repetitive back-and-forth motion at CEJ
2. Use of hard toothbrush and abrasive toothpastes and powders
3. Occupational exposure to grit or dust; coarse foods in diet are contributors
B. Clinical features (Fig. 8.65)
1. Notching and grooving at cervical margins of teeth; especially over canine eminence and premolar areas
2. Promotes recession of gingiva, tooth sensitivity
3. Pipe smoking may abrade teeth, where pipe is clenched between teeth
4. Notching associated with certain occupations or habits; carpenters and tailors who hold tacks, nails, and pins between teeth


FIG. 8.65Abrasion of the cervical area of mandibular premolars caused by aggressive toothbrushing. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Abfraction
A. Etiology—related to microfracture of tooth structure in areas of focused stress; biomechanical forces due to tooth flexion
B. Age—adults
C. Location
1. Cervical area of teeth
2. Location predisposes the patient to toothbrush abrasion
D. Clinical features—wedge-shaped or V-shaped notch, loss of tooth structure at the CEJ; exposure of dentin
E. Treatment—restorations may be indicate


Erosion
A. Etiology—loss of tooth structure resulting from chemical action; when caused by stomach acid, it is known as perimylolysis
1. GI reflux, vomiting during pregnancy
2. Eating disorders (bulimia)
3. Intake of acidic or low-pH foods, such as carbonated or sports drinks
4. Citric acid in lozenges or lemon sucking
B. Clinical features (Fig. 8.66A and B)
1. Pattern of hard tissue loss indicative of etiology
2. Labial or buccal surfaces; due to placement of acidic substance against teeth; may see eroded or washed away enamel/dentin on cervical or occlusal surfaces
3. Dental restorations often appear raised above remaining tooth structure, due to eroded enamel and dentin
4. Erosion affecting maxillary lingual surfaces is indicative of GI reflux or bulimia; often see narrow “picture frame” of remaining enamel on lingual
5. Erosion due to stomach acid occurs rapidly; days to weeks
6. Hypersensitivity of affected teeth
7. Home care caution advised; do not follow acidic insult with aggressive brushing and abrasive toothpastes; this can accelerate hard tissue loss; best to rinse with basic rinse or water and allow normal buffering capacity of saliva


FIG. 8.66Erosion caused by bulimia. (A) Decreased tooth size. (B) Erosion of maxillary lingual surfaces. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Methamphetamine Abuse and Addiction
A. Street names: meth, speed, crystal, ice, glass, fire
B. Etiology—man-made psychostimulant that can be injected, snorted, inhaled, taken orally, or smoked
1. Mood alterations depend on how it is taken
2. Smoking produces a high that can last 10 to 24 hours
C. Demographics
1. Typical user is Caucasian, 20 to 30 years of age
2. Increased incidence in college students, young professionals
3. Usage increasing in females
D. Clinical—general signs and symptoms
1. Inability to sleep, sometimes for days
2. Irritability, sudden mood swings
3. Extreme anorexia (causes a decrease in appetite)
4. Tremors, repetitive motor activities
5. Aggressive behavior, uncontrolled and violent
6. Increased craving for sweets
7. Scabbing on face, arms, torso, and legs, caused by scratching
8. Cravings for and high consumption of high-sugar soft drinks with caffeine
E. Clinical—oral signs and symptoms: “meth mouth”
1. Snorting or smoking produces corrosive vapors; along with self-neglect and consumption of high sugar foods results in significant and rapid damage to teeth and oral tissues
2. Rampant caries especially facial and proximal surfaces of anterior teeth, resembles radiation caries
3. Aggressive erosion of enamel, advanced gingival problems and destruction of periodontal tissues
4. Methamphetamine produces severe xerostomia, loss of protective buffering capacity of saliva
5. Bruxism and clenching due to feeling anxious and nervous, leads to attrition, fractured teeth
6. Dangerous interactions with common local anesthetics, nitrous oxide, and pain medications
Tetracycline and Minocycline Staining of Teeth
A. Etiology—ingested tetracycline medication incorporated into teeth during tooth development, primary, or permanent dentitions. Tetracycline and minocycline are contraindicated for use in children under 8 years of age due to their permanent negative effects on bone structure. The only exception would be in treating malaria or anthrax when no other options are available. The antibiotic may cause tooth discoloration as well, so this antibiotic is not prescribed for children. Today, adults who previously were prescribed this antibiotic are sometimes seen clinically with the resulting stain
B. Clinical—endogenous tooth staining, enamel hypoplasia
1. Tetracycline incorporated into tissues that are calcifying at time of drug administration, teeth, cartilage, bone
2. Staining can occur in primary teeth in utero; timing is usually second trimester; after birth to up to crown completion ages 12 to 16
3. May be seen in association with enamel hypoplasia
4. Permanent discoloration of teeth from yellow-green to brown-gray; generally discovered when teeth erupt
5. Minocycline, a semisynthetic derivative of tetracycline, can also stain a variety of soft and hard tissues including teeth
6. Adult-onset of tooth discoloration has been reported
7. Black bones, black or green tooth roots, and darkening of crowns of permanent teeth have been reported with minocycline
C. Prevention is key; these medications should not be prescribed to children during tooth formation; restrict use in pregnant and nursing mothers; drug can cross placenta and also enter breast milk
Developmental Defects Affecting Enamel and Dentin
Enamel hypoplasia—generic term refers to incomplete or defective development of enamel


A. Etiology—disruption of ameloblasts during enamel production
B. Nonhereditary factors include:
1. Fever or vitamin deficiency—band-like pattern (contemporaneous enamel hypoplasia)
2. Local infection or trauma to one or more developing tooth germs (Turner’s tooth)
3. Fluoride ingestion—mottling, rough, porous enamel, chalky white, picks up stains
4. Enamel hypoplasia of congenital syphilis (spirochetes cross placenta, affect ameloblasts: mulberry molars, Hutchinson’s incisors)
Amelogenesis Imperfecta
A. Etiology—hereditary group of disorders affecting formation of tooth enamel; mutations in genes involved in process of enamel formation (AMELX, ENAM, or MMP20)
B. AI can be divided into four basic types:
1. Hypoplastic—represents majority of all cases of AI; incomplete or arrested development of enamel matrix (Fig. 8.67)
a. Etiology—hereditary
b. Clinical features—enamel matrix responsible for crown shape, insufficient matrix leads to smaller teeth with thin enamel; pitting and vertical grooves, yellow to dark-brown color, open contacts, and occlusal wear
c. Radiographic appearance—enamel may be absent or very thin layer over cusp tips and interproximal areas
d. Histologic characteristics—thin, defective enamel, dentin normal
e. Treatment—restorations; crowns; bonding
2. Hypocalcified—least common type of AI; defect in mineralization of enamel matrix (Fig. 8.68)
a. Etiology—hereditary
b. Clinical features—normal teeth on eruption but wear down quickly to expose dentin; enamel soft and uncalcified, chalky appearance, teeth stain rapidly, susceptible to caries, may have open bite; dentin normal
c. Radiographic appearance—tooth shape normal; enamel less radiopaque so dentin and enamel have similar radiodensity, enamel may appear “moth eaten”
d. Histologic characteristics—broadening of interprismatic substance; distinct enamel prisms; enamel low in mineral content
e. Treatment—restorations; crowns; bonding
3. Hypomaturation—proper matrix deposition, early mineralization, but enamel crystalline structure fails to mature
a. Etiology—hereditary
b. Clinical features—teeth appear mottled and opaque, poorly formed crystals fail to reflect light, results in white appearance
(1) Malformed enamel, soft and porous; dentin normal
(2) Enamel easily chips from crowns of teeth
(3) Rare form of hypomaturation type AI: “snowcapped teeth” (Fig. 8.69)
4. Hypoplastic/hypomaturation/taurodontism—enamel poorly formed, porous and soft; molars exhibit taurodontism
a. Etiology—hereditary
b. Clinical features—small teeth with thin enamel which is pitted, and appears yellow to brown in color; taurodontism of molars; dentin normal


FIG. 8.67Pitted autosomal dominant amelogenesis imperfecta. Note the multiple pits on the labial surface of teeth. Some of the pits have been filled with composite. From Young WG, Sedano HO. Atlas of Oral Pathology. University of Minnesota Press; 1981.


FIG. 8.68Note the loss of enamel in the teeth of a patient with hypocalcified amelogenesis imperfecta. From Odell E. Cawson’s Essentials of Oral Pathology and Oral Medicine. 9th ed. Elsevier; 2017.


FIG. 8.69Note the uniform whitening of incisal edges and occlusal cusps in a case of “snowcapped” amelogenesis imperfecta. From Odell E. Cawson’s Essentials of Oral Pathology and Oral Medicine. 9th ed. Elsevier; 2017.
Dentinogenesis Imperfecta (Hereditary Opalescent Dentin)
A. Etiology—hereditary group of disorders affecting formation of tooth dentin; affects tissues formed from dental papilla (mesodermal component: forms dentin and pulp); enamel normal
B. Clinical features (Fig. 8.70A)
1. Defective pulp formation and mineralization of dentin
2. Altered dentin gives teeth opalescent hue
3. Teeth brown to gray to bluish in color
4. Overlying enamel poorly supported, chips, breaks, and wears away
C. Radiographic appearance (Fig. 8.70B)
1. Partial or total obliteration of pulp chambers and root canals
2. Bulbous crowns with distinct constriction at CEJ: “thistle-tube” shaped pulp chamber
3. Cementum, periodontal membrane, and alveolar bone appear normal
D. Histologic characteristics
1. Dentin composed of irregular tubules; uncalcified matrix
2. Odontoblasts degenerate easily within the matrix
3. Decrease in inorganic content
E. Treatment—full crowns; caution needed with partial appliances due to potential for root fractures


FIG. 8.70(A) Clinical view of dentinogenesis imperfecta. (B) Radiographic view. Courtesy Dr. Edward V. Zegarelli. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Developmental Defects Affecting Tooth Shape
Dilaceration
A. Abnormal sharp bend or curve in tooth root (Fig. 8.71A)
B. Etiology—trauma during tooth development
1. May occur anywhere from CEJ to tooth apex
2. Results from displacement of Hertwig’s epithelial root sheath
C. Radiographic appearance—sharp bend or curve in the root (Fig. 8.71B)
D. Treatment—no treatment; may present problem if tooth extracted or requires endodontic treatment


FIG. 8.71(A) Dilaceration on the distal root of an extracted tooth. (B) Mesial root dilaceration on a mandibular second molar. A, Courtesy Dr. Rudy Melfi. A and B, From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Fusion
A. Union of two normally separated tooth germs
B. Etiology—physical force or external pressure causes contact between developing teeth
C. Clinical features (Fig. 8.72A and B)
1. If defect occurs early in development, one large tooth results
2. If defect occurs later, fusion of roots only
3. Dentin always confluent (true fusion)
4. Seen in both primary and permanent dentitions
5. Occurs between two normal tooth germs or between one normal tooth germ and one supernumerary tooth germ
D. Location—usually anterior region; incisors most often affected
E. Radiographic appearance—dentin confluent; can have separate or fused root canals
F. Treatment—usually none


FIG. 8.72(A) Clinical view of fusion involving a permanent mandibular lateral incisor. (B) Fusion of mandibular molars. A, Courtesy Dr. George Blozis. B. Courtesy Dr. Rudy Melfi. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Gemination
A. Twinning or dividing of a single tooth germ; results in incomplete formation of two teeth (gemination means paired or occurring in twos)
B. Etiology—unknown; possibly trauma
C. Location—can affect the primary or permanent dentition, although it is slightly more common in the primary dentition (e.g., in mandibular incisors or in permanent maxillary incisors)
D. Clinically tooth most often presents with crown which appears to incompletely split in two; with one root, one root canal (Fig. 8.73A and B)
E. Counting tooth crowns can often help distinguish gemination from fusion; in fusion less than the normal number of teeth appear to be present; in gemination more than the normal number of teeth appear to be present


FIG. 8.73Clinical (A) and radiographic (B) views of gemination seen in the right maxillary central incisor. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Concrescence
A. Fusion of tooth roots by cementum only; occurs after root formation is complete during cementum formation (Fig. 8.74A)
B. Etiology—crowding of teeth with close root proximity; cementum of teeth becomes confluent
C. Location—most often seen in adjacent maxillary molars
D. Radiographic appearance—important in establishing diagnosis; teeth joined (fused together) at root surfaces (Fig. 8.74B)
E. Treatment and prognosis—usually no treatment; significantly complicates tooth extraction


FIG. 8.74(A and B) Example of concrescence seen in extracted teeth and in a corresponding radiograph. Courtesy Dr. George Blozis. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Dens Invaginatus (Dens in Dente)
A. Also known as “tooth within a tooth”
B. Etiology—invagination (infolding) of enamel organ during crown formation
C. Location—most frequently anterior teeth, may occur bilaterally, usually maxillary lateral incisor, not visible without radiograph (Fig. 8.75)
D. Microportal in cingulum area, forms direct communication with pulp and provides entry for bacteria
E. Apical pathology due to pulpal necrosis often occurs soon after tooth eruption
F. Endodontic treatment
G. Radiographic appearance—establishes diagnosis, pear-shaped defect projects down into root canal, gives appearance of small tooth within the pulp chamber (Fig. 8.76)
H. Treatment—preventive restoration in cingulum area; early preemptive endodontic treatment is an important option


FIG. 8.75Clinical view of dens in dente in maxillary lateral incisor. Courtesy Dr. George Blozis. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.


FIG. 8.76Radiograph of dens in dente in maxillary lateral incisor. From Odell E. Cawson’s Essentials of Oral Pathology and Oral Medicine. 9th ed. Elsevier; 2017.
Dens Evaginatus
A. Supernumerary or extra cusp on the occlusal surface
B. Etiology—evagination (outgrowth, proliferation) of enamel organ during crown formation
C. Location—most often occlusal surface of premolars (“tuberculated” premolars); may be unilateral or bilateral
D. Clinical appearance—small, round nodule of enamel forming an extra cusp on the occlusal surface (Fig. 8.77)
E. Frequently contains a slender extension of pulp
F. Cusp wear, fracture, or equilibration may lead to pulp exposure and necrosis
G. Treatment—usually none; caution with restorative procedures and occlusal adjustment
H. “Talon” cusp is considered a form of dens evaginatus


FIG. 8.77Dens evaginatus of maxillary premolar. Courtesy Dr. Margot Van Dis. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Natal Teeth
A. Teeth present at birth; neonatal teeth are those that erupt within 30 days after birth
B. Etiology
1. Most develop from dental lamina; usually a hollow calcified cap of enamel and dentin without pulp tissue; often little to no root structure
2. Can be associated with other developmental abnormalities and recognized syndromes
C. Location—small conical or normal shaped “tooth”; usually found in mandibular incisor area; may be bilateral
D. Histologic characteristics—thin hollow cap of enamel and dentin or keratinized epithelial structure, without developed root structure
E. Treatment and prognosis
1. Often wobbly due to lack of developed root; potential risk of infant inhaling tooth if dislodged
2. Difficulty in feeding for infant and mother
3. May produce ulceration to ventral surface of tongue (Riga-Fede disease)
4. Removal often performed shortly after birth
Developmental Defects Affecting the Number of Teeth
Congenitally Missing Teeth
A. Congenital variations in number of teeth
B. Etiology—developmental, may be familial or inherited; failure of dental lamina to form tooth buds
C. Two forms
1. Total anodontia
a. Complete absence of all teeth to form; abnormality of ectoderm
b. May involve both primary and permanent dentitions
c. Most often associated with ectodermal dysplasia, a group of inherited syndromes
2. Hypodontia (partial anodontia) (Fig. 8.78A and B)
a. Failure of some teeth to form; can range from one to multiple teeth
b. Primary or permanent dentition may be affected
c. Most frequently seen: third molars, maxillary lateral incisors, mandibular second premolars
d. May be familial or hereditary and part of a syndrome
e. Radiographic evaluation required to determine hypodontia versus unerupted teeth
f. Missing teeth may be unerupted, impacted, and/or malformed; odontodysplasia, “ghost teeth” (Fig. 8.79)
D. Treatment for missing teeth
1. Ranges from no treatment to restorative crowns and bridges
2. Orthodontics
3. Space maintainers, partial or complete dentures
4. Dental implants


FIG. 8.78(A and B) Hypodontia. The missing teeth were not extracted; they never developed. A, Courtesy Dr. George Blozis. B, Courtesy Dr. Margot Van Dis. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description


FIG. 8.79Regional odontodysplasia. From Regezi J, Sciubba J, Jordan RCK. Oral Pathology: Clinical Pathologic Correlations. 7th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2017.
Supernumerary Teeth (Hyperdontia)
A. Extra teeth
B. Etiology—developmental, may be familial or inherited, dental lamina produces extra tooth buds
C. Clinical features; varies from one to multiple extra teeth
1. May block the eruption path of other teeth
2. Supernumerary teeth are frequently impacted
3. Mesiodens—most common supernumerary tooth; cone-shaped crown; short root; located between maxillary centrals (Fig. 8.80A–C)
4. Other supernumerary teeth include maxillary fourth molar—distal to the third molar; maxillary paramolar—usually a small molar; located buccally or lingually in the area of the maxillary or mandibular molars
5. May be seen in association with inherited disorders, such as Cleidocranial dysplasia or Gardner’s syndrome
D. Treatment—evaluate unerupted supernumeraries; remove if associated with pathology or interference with normal dentition


FIG. 8.80(A) Mesiodens seen between maxillary central incisors. (B) Radiograph of a mesiodens. (C) Radiograph showing a pair of inverted, impacted mesiodens. A and B, Courtesy Dr. George Blozis. A to C, From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Developmental Defects Affecting Tooth Size
Macrodontia
A. Condition in which a normal tooth or teeth are larger than normal; may be localized to a single tooth or generalized over whole dentition; generalized macrodontia has been associated with gigantism
B. Not to be confused with larger-appearing tooth resulting from germination or fusion
Microdontia
A. Condition in which a normal tooth or teeth are smaller than normal; may be localized to a single tooth or generalized over the whole dentition; generalized microdontia has been associated with certain forms of dwarfism
B. Maxillary lateral incisor (may be peg shaped) and third molar most frequently affected (Fig. 8.81)


FIG. 8.81Peg-shaped lateral incisor. Courtesy Dr. George Blozis. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Abnormalities of Mucous Membranes or Skin
Amalgam Tatto
A. Etiology—fragments of dental amalgam embedded in mucosa or gingiva; silver particles leach into surrounding connective tissue and cause discoloration
B. Clinical features—gray to blue submucosal area on gingiva or adjacent mucosa; often located near site of prior amalgam restoration(s) (Fig. 8.82A)
C. Residual fragments left from amalgam removal or carving become trapped in gingival tissues; may also be seen in tissue over root apex in apicoectomies capped with amalgam
D. “Blue” gingiva may result when slurry of amalgam particles; produced with crown preparation; enters sulcus (retraction cord may embed amalgam particles in sulcus)
E. Radiographic appearance—can aid in diagnosis; amalgam particles appear radiopaque when present (Fig. 8.82B)
F. Treatment—none; however, important to differentiate from other pigmented lesions, such as blue nevus, melanoma, early Kaposi sarcoma; biopsy may be needed for definitive diagnosis


FIG. 8.82(A) This blue-gray pigmentation on the gingiva is an amalgam tattoo. (B) Periapical radiograph showing amalgam particles in the gingival tissue. A, From James D, Elston DM, Treat JR, et al. Andrews’ Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology 13th ed. Elsevier; 2020. B, From Koenig LJ, Tamimi DF, Petrikowski CG, et al. Diagnostic Imaging: Oral and Maxillofacial. 2nd ed. Elsevier; 2017.
Follow for extended description
Melanin Pigmentation
A. Wide variation in normal melanin pigmentation of skin and oral mucosa (Fig. 8.83)
B. Etiology—hereditary: racial pigmentation, those with dark complexions have more melanin than those with lighter complexions; or acquired: result of inflammation or systemic disorder
C. Physiologic (ethnic/racial) pigmentation genetically determined
D. Pathologic melanin pigmentation of oral mucosa can occur with endocrine disorders, such as Addison disease or be drug induced by a variety of medications such as minocycline, bleomycin, cyclophosphamide
E. Post inflammatory pigmentation of skin and oral mucosa can occur after an injury or longstanding inflammatory condition, such as lichen planus (Fig. 8.84)
F. Smoking associated melanosis can be seen with tobacco use, especially maxillary anterior facial gingiva and the palatal region


FIG. 8.83Melanin pigmentation of the gingiva. From Eley BM, Soory M, Manson JD. Periodontics. 6th ed. Elsevier Ltd. 2014


FIG. 8.84Posttraumatic melanin pigmentation. This area of melanin pigmentation on the gingiva occurred after the healing of an injury caused by trauma. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Angular Cheilitis (Perlèche)
A. Etiology—red cracking, fissuring, patches at corners (angles) of mouth due to:
1. Decreased vertical dimension of occlusion, lips turn down at corners promotes moisture accumulation, ill-fitting dentures
2. Secondary infection by Candida albicans prominent feature
3. Nutritional deficiencies account for 25% of all cases with noted vitamin deficiency of iron and B vitamins B2, B3, B6, B12)
4. Allergic contact dermatitis, especially due to use of lipstick and lip balm
5. Xerostomia, some systemic diseases, and medications contribute
B. Clinical features—erosive inflammation and cracking or fissuring at the corners of the mouth; extends onto facial skin; may be unilateral or bilateral (Fig. 8.85)
C. Histologic characteristics—inflammatory condition often with presence of microorganisms: Candida albicans or Staphylococcus aureus most common
D. Treatment—depends on the etiology: correction of decreased vertical dimension associated with dentures; improved intake of B vitamins in diet; remove source of contact dermatitis such as lip balm with flavoring agents, or lipstick; topical antifungal or antibacterial ointment if needed


FIG. 8.85Angular cheilitis. From Kliegman RM, St Geme JW III, Blum NJ. Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. 21st ed. Elsevier Inc.; 2020.
Fordyce Granules
A. Etiology—normal developmental soft tissue variation; ectopic sebaceous glands
B. Clinical features (Fig. 8.86)
1. Most observed on the buccal mucosa, and vermilion border of the lips
2. Yellowish or white papules may be slightly raised, 1 to 5 mm in size
3. Found in 80% to 95% of adults, prominent after puberty
4. Frequently distributed in groups or clusters of 30 to 100
C. Location—buccal mucosa and lips; also reported on genital mucosa
D. Histologic characteristics—normal sebaceous gland architecture without associated hair follicle
E. Treatment—none, unless cosmetic concern


FIG. 8.86Fordyce granules on the buccal mucosa. From Neville B, Damm DD, Allen CM, et al. Color Atlas of Oral and Maxillofacial Diseases. Elsevier Inc.; 2010.
Abnormalities Affecting the Tongue
Benign and malignant disturbances may occur on the tongue. The tongue may have different appearances at any given time. This includes discoloration from various foods, normal trauma that occurs on the tongue tissue, the loss of the papillae at any given time due to disease, viral/bacterial causes, and accidents. Some entities may have the appearance of malignant changes. The lateral border of the tongue and the floor of the mouth are at higher risk for oral cancer. The lateral border of the tongue may be involved in malignant changes and extend back into the oropharyngeal areas. This makes the oral exam a crucial component for detection of early cancerous lesions.


Geographic Tongue (Benign Migratory Glossitis, Erythema Migrans)
A. Etiology—unknown; tends to run in families; genetics may play a role; seen more frequently in patients with psoriasis and fissured tongue
B. Age and gender—any age; frequently detected in children and young adults; no gender predilection
C. Clinical features (Fig. 8.87A)
1. Patches on tongue of various sizes and shapes, with curved “circinate” raised white to yellow borders
2. Center of patches appears bald due to loss of filiform papillae
3. Repeated cycles of patches developing, regenerating filiform papillae, and migrating on tongue surface (hence term geographic)
4. Discomfort may occur when the patient eats spicy or acidic foods
5. Important to differentiate from other pathologic conditions on tongue
6. Condition can occur on oral mucosa away from tongue (ectopic “geographic tongue”), where it goes by name erythema migrans (Fig. 8.87B)
D. Treatment—none, unless symptomatic. Some patients may exhibit fissuring of the tongue, and Candida Albicans can occur along with the fissuring, especially when corticosteroids are prescribed. There is a psychological aspect for some patients who may believe they have a malignancy when changes occur with the tongue. Also, persons report being self-conscious about the appearance of the tongue. This is especially concerning when they speak, as the appearance of the tongue may be noticed by others. Also, the constant changes related to geographic tongue promotes the fear of malignancy. The patient may think that changes have occurred and request further evaluations


FIG. 8.87(A) Geographic tongue. (B) Ectopic geographic tongue observed in the anterior mandibular mucosa. From Ibsen OAC, Phelan JA. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist. 6th ed. Elsevier Saunders; 2014.
Follow for extended description
Hairy Tongue (Lingua Villosa)
A. Etiology—filiform papillae on tongue do not shed as they should and grow longer; gives the perception of hair; food, bacteria, or yeast coat papillae and produce coloration: white, green, black; precipitating factors include:
1. Certain medications, especially antibiotics
2. Frequent use of hydrogen peroxide or antimicrobial rinses
3. Excessive alcohol use
4. Proton-pump inhibitors (acid reflux)
5. Radiation to head and neck
B. Clinical features—furry appearance on the dorsal surface of the tongue; white and cream colored to black coloration (lingua villosa nigra) (Fig. 8.88)
C. Treatment and prognosis
1. Gentle brushing or scraping of the tongue with a brush and tongue cleaner is needed. If candida is involved, treatment with an antifungal agent is necessary. All appliances should be treated as well. During treatment and after clearing, all toothbrushes need replacing
2. Condition resolves when contributing factors eliminated


FIG. 8.88Black hairy tongue. From Scully C. Oral and Maxillofacial Medicine: The Basis of Diagnosis and Treatment. 3rd ed. Elsevier; 2013.
Oropharyngeal Cancer of the Tongue and Tonsillar Cancer
Human papillomavirus (HPV) has been recognized for decades as a key player in cervical cancers. HPV is a double stranded DNA virus and is a common sexually transmitted infection. It has a global prevalence of around 11.7%, with more than 80% of the global populations being infected at some point in their lifetime with the virus. The two most common HPV types affecting the oropharyngeal and oral tissues are HVP 16 and 18. There is a small percentage, 3% to 5%, of oral squamous cell carcinomas arising from oral potentially malignant disorders (OPMD) through genetic alterations. Currently, there have been approximately 200 HPV types of the virus identified. Some are low-risk and others are high-risk types. Areas of the body that can be affected by HPV are skin, the cervical area, vulvar, anus, and penile and the oropharyngeal tissues.1


A. Infection with HPV is most often found in these types of lesions. Several etiologies are suggested:
1. Skin to skin contact, since HPV can be passed from one partner to another through normal sexual relations and very close proximity
2. The primary HPV source is HPV 16 related to tongue and tonsillar cancer. This is a high-risk type of HPV. There are over 200 types of HPV with both low-risk groups, such as 2, 6, 11, and 13, and with high-risk groups, such as HPV 16, 18, 31, and 33
3. Oral sex is a common source
4. The number of sexual partners is associated, since this increases the chances of exposure and a known sexual contact of 5 to 7 individuals increases the risk
5. Alcohol, tobacco, and betel quid increase the chance of malignancy and immunosuppression of the individual. Being infected at a young age and using these products is a risk factor of increasing susceptibility to malignancy
6. The majority of the lesions are found on the lateral border of the tongue, and this extends into the tonsillar region in many cases. The floor of the mouth is another site frequently affected because of the increased blood supply and an affinity for the salivary ducts and oropharyngeal tissues. Fig. 8.89 is representative of a patient with cancer in the tonsillar region. There is a posterior white, plaque-like lesion covering most of the tonsillar area on both left and right sides engulfing the uvula and impinging on the tonsil
7. The nasopharynx is affected in some cases and with some regional populations
B. Age and Gender: HPV infection is 2 times more common in white males, and the highest age-group is 55 to 64. A younger segment is on the rise without any coexisting factors. Black males are the second highest group, followed by American Indians. Statistically, HPV cancer accounts for 2.8% of all new cancer cases in the United States.
C. Clinical Features: The vesicles can appear as erythemic with a papillary appearance. There is often lymph node involvement of the cervical nodes and the mandibular lymph nodes. A lesion that does not heal is persistent, whether red or white. A lesion that bleeds easily should not be ignored. There may be difficulty for the person to chew, swallow, open the mouth fully, or move the tongue or the jaw. The person may complain of ear pain, tooth pain, or a general sense of being uncomfortable.
D. Treatment: The prognosis of a person who develops oral cancer that is HPV positive has a better outcome than those who are not infected with the virus. When found early, the survival rate can be 80 to 90%. Referral to an otolaryngologist is crucial and timely. Dental work is best treated by a facility that treats this type of cancer. The dental needs must be met before any radiation treatment is performed. Oral medicine practices are well-versed in the treatment of HPV issues and will work alongside the surgeon in incorporating the dental needs of the patient. The careful palpation of areas within the head and neck is extremely important in early detection of this infection. The most common route of transmission is through sexual intercourse and through direct contact. Most patients who are exposed to the HPV virus clear the virus within 1 to 2 years. There have been multiple studies assessing the correlation of OLP, OL, and other mucosal diseases of a cell-mediated nature with limited results.1,8


FIG. 8.89Image of posterior white, plaque-like lesion covering most of the tonsillar area on both left and right sides engulfing the uvula and impinging on the tonsils. The tissue has a cauliflower appearance. Lesion was diagnosed as squamous cell carcinoma related to HPV 16. Courtesy Dr. Martin Tyler from DeLong L and Burkhart NW, General and Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist.
Website Information and Resources
Source        Website Address        Description
National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research        http://www.nidcr.nih.gov/        News and information related to dentistry and information about the institute’s research
Mayo Clinic Medicine Center        http://www.mayoclinic.org        Information and links to health conditions and diseases
Clinical trials listing service        http://www.centerwatch.com        International listing of clinical research trials and medical centers that perform clinical research and drug therapies newly approved by the US Food and Drug Administration
National Cancer Institute        http://www.nci.nih.gov        Information about types of cancer, treatments, risk factors, screening, tests, and statistics
American Cancer Society        http://cancer.org        Information about cancers and leukemias from both professional and patient points of view
American Society of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology        http://www.aspho.org        Information for both professionals and patients about pediatric hematology and oncology
Support for People with Oral and Head and Neck Cancers        http://www.spohnc.org        Information and support for those suffering from oral and head and neck cancers
National Institute of Health/Aging        https://www.nia.nih.gov/        Health topics; aging research; resources for health professionals
Center for Disease Control: HIV Guidelines        https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/guidelines/index.html        Guidelines for HIV testing; prevention and care; preventing new infections
CDC recommendations on Shingles (Herpes Zoster)        https://www.cdc.gov/shingles/         
Leukemia and Lymphoma Society of America        http://www.leukemia.org        Information about blood-related cancers
The International Oral Lichen Planus Support Group        https://rarediseases.org/organizations/international-oral-lichen-planus-support-group/        Information and support for patients with Oral Lichen Planus Though Texas A&M College of Dentistry. Dallas Texas Stomatology Center
The International Pemphigoid and Pemphigus Foundation        https://www.pemphigus.org/        Information and support for patients with Oral Lichen Planus Though Texas A&M College of Dentistry. Dallas Texas Stomatology Center
NORD:


The National Organization for Rare Disorders


https://rarediseases.org/?gad_source=1&gclid=Cj0KCQjwmOm3BhC8ARIsAOSbapUgyrohPpv8iOWKo5is3rmQyyUJ8XF2b-iUUawm-0Xpd–Zdr5vnsYaAvqwEALw_wcB        NORD’s Rare Disease Video Library provides brief introductions to rare disease topics for patients and caregivers. NORD collaborates with medical experts, patient organizations and videographers to develop the videos, which are made possible by individual donations, educational grants, and corporate sponsorships. NORD is solely responsible for the content.


CHAPTER 8 REVIEW QUESTIONS

1. Small, white to yellow raised sebaceous glands appear as spots in hairless areas of the body. What is the same for these spots?
a. Fordyce granules
b. Lichen planus
c. Morsicatio buccarum (Cheek biting)
d. Leukoedema

2. Lichen planus that exhibits a white lacy appearance is termed:
a. Atrophic lichen planus
b. Reticular lichen planus
c. Erosive lichen planus
d. Plaque-like lichen planus

3. The varicella-zoster virus causes which of the following?
a. Herpes Labialis
b. Shingles
c. Primary Herpetic Gingivostomatitis
d. Herpangina

4. One characteristic associated with a differentiation of Fordyce granules and cheek bites is which of the following:
a. Both are found in all age groups
b. When the tissue is stretched, opalescence disappears
c. It is found in the buccal mucosa
d. Both may have a white/yellow hue in appearance

5. Fordyce granules are ectopic sebaceous granules and affect most adults but are not found in those who have not reached puberty. This is due to:
a. Chronic trauma
b. Androgenic hormones
c. Dental product sensitivity
d. Due to hyperkeratosis

6. The irritation fibroma is most often found in certain oral areas. Which choice best describes the location.
a. The tongue
b. The vestibular areas
c. Areas of high trauma such as the lips, tongue, and gingiva
d. The soft palate

7. The most common age group for an irritation fibroma is:
a. Adolescent ages in both males and females
b. A 45-year-old female
c. A 65-year-old male patient
d. A 70-year-old geriatric female patient

8. A mucocele is not a true cyst because of which of the following?
a. The mucin is surrounded with granulation tissue.
b. the mucin is surrounded with connective tissue.
c. The mucin is not surrounded with epithelium.
d. The salivary duct is dilated due to epithelial thickening.
|
9. When the mucocele or Extravasation Phenomenon occurs in the floor of the mouth affecting the sublingual or submandibular glands, the correct term would be which of the following?
a. Dentigerous cyst
b. Primordial cyst
c. Ranula
d. Sialometaplasia

10. A white line that extends from the anterior to the buccal mucosa caused by the impact of occlusion is called:
a. Leukoedema
b. Stomatitis
c. Lichen planus
d. Linea alba

11. Nicotine stomatitis denotes irritation of the minor salivary glands. Where does this occur?
a. The floor of the mouth
b. The buccal mucosa
c. The palatal region
d. The tongue

12. Which of the following would not be the etiology in the development of the torus palatinus?
a. Bacterial or viral components
b. Genetic propensity
c. Masticatory factors
d. Trauma to the bone

13. The torus mandibularis most often is observed in which age group?
a. Females in the 20- to 30-year-old age group
b. Males in the 13- to 16-year-old age group
c. Children under 10 years of age
d. Males in the 20- to 30-year age group

14. A patient who has the mandibular right and left premolars congenitally missing is probably suffering with which of the disorders listed below?
a. Ectodermal dysplasia
b. Osteopetrosis
c. Sarcoidosis
d. Laugier-Hunziker syndrome

15. All of the following are a contributing factor in Lingua villosa (Hairy Tongue) EXCEPT one. Which one is the EXCEPTION?
a. Radiation to the head and neck
b. The use of proton-pump inhibitors
c. Excessive alcohol use
d. Consumption of excessive xylitol products such as gum and mints

16. Two roots fused together in the cementum is called:
a. Fusion
b. Concrescence
c. Gemination
d. Dilaceration

17. The Pleomorphic adenoma accounts for what percentage of all salivary gland tumors?
a. 60%
b. 70%
c. 80%
d. 90%

18. The Thyroglossal Tract Cyst is located in the midline of the neck. Which of the tasks performed by a dental hygienist is the most important in identifying this cyst? Select the best answer.
a. Update radiograph
b. A panoramic x-ray
c. A complete medical history
d. A thorough thyroid exam

19. The age range of a person who develops a thyroglossal tract cyst is:
a. Older adults
b. Middle-aged adults
c. Young adults
d. Children

20. Which of the following is NOT true for the pleomorphic adenoma?
a. It occurs most commonly in adults
b. It occurs in the submandibular gland
c. There is a 5% malignant transformation rate
d. It is encapsulated

21. The most commonly occurring odontogenic cyst is:
a. Residual cyst
b. Periapical cyst (radicular cysts)
c. Odontogenic Keratocyst
d. Dentigerous cyst

22. The cause of a residual cyst is:
a. A viral component
b. Improper removal of a tooth
c. Trauma
d. Genetic propensity

23. The simple bone cyst is treated using which of the following protocols?
a. Curettage
b. Antibiotics
c. There is no treatment
d. Endodontic treatment for the nonvital tooth

24. Sickle Cell Anemia is predominately found in African American Populations. However, this may be found in other populations as well. Which group listed below is also susceptible to this disorder?
a. Mediterranean/Asian groups
b. Northern European groups
c. French
d. Slavic groups

25. Which of the following is a major risk factor for oropharyngeal cancer in the tonsillar region?
a. Epstein-Bar virus
b. Herpes simplex virus
c. Human papillomavirus
d. Varicella-Zoster virus

26. Pernicious Anemia is also known as:
a. Primary aplastic anemia
b. Plummer-Vinson syndrome
c. Thalassemia
d. Polycythemia

27. A patient who is experiencing a loss of filiform papillae, angular cheilitis, pallor of the oral mucosa and burning of the tongue may be deficient in which of the following?
a. Vitamin B12
b. Iron
c. Vitamin B6
d. Vitamin D

28. The most common oral implication of HIV is:
a. Candidiasis
b. Kaposi Sarcoma
c. Anemia
d. Fibromas

29. The abnormal Philadelphia 22 chromosome is associated with which of the following?
a. Hemophilia
b. Primary polycythemia
c. Chronic leukemia
d. Pernicious anemia

30. Cherubism is an inherited autosomal dominant disorder predominately in females. It is a defect of SH3BP2 gene. The disorder is usually found in which age group of patients?
a. Very young children
b. Young adults
c. Middle age
d. Elderly

31. The patient with Cherubism is at risk for which of the following?
a. Hemophilia
b. Sarcoma
c. Polycythemia
d. Aneurysmal bone cyst

32. The patient who is at risk for pemphigoid should be evaluated for which of the following?
a. Skin cancer
b. Hearing issues
c. Eye damage
d. Severe bone loss-possible osteoporosis

33. Osteomalacia means “soft bones,” but what is the term used for adults who have demineralization of bones?
a. Paget disease
b. Cherubism
c. Rickets
d. Osteopenia

34. The most likely area to witness Abfraction would be:
a. The incisal edge of the lower anterior teeth
b. The occlusal surface of molars
c. The cervical areas of teeth at the CEJ
d. The lingual of maxillary incisors

35. Amelogenesis imperfecta is categorized into four types. Which type listed is the least common type?
a. Hypoplastic
b. Hypocalcified
c. Hypomaturation
d. Hypoplastic/hypomaturation/taurodontism

36. The term for two roots fused together in the cementum is:
a. Fusion
b. Concrescence
c. Gemination
d. Dilaceration

37. Dens invaginatus (Dens in Dente) occurs most frequently in which location?
a. Mandibular teeth
b. Maxillary molars
c. Mandibular premolars
d. Maxillary lateral incisors

38. Geographic tongue (benign migratory glossitis) is associated with all of the following EXCEPT one. Which one is the EXCEPTION?
a. Genetic susceptibility
b. Fissured tongue
c. Psoriasis
d. May have a malignancy component

39. Which is the common site of Fordyce granules?
a. The buccal mucosa
b. The floor of the mouth
c. The posterior most palate region
d. The labial and lingual frenum
40. Hairy tongue is associated with the elongation of which papillae?
a. Circumvallate
b. Fungiform
c. Filiform
d. Folate

41. Of the following diseases, in which one would you expect to see melanin production and the oral pigmentation associated with the disorder?
a. HPV infection
b. Addison disease
c. Condyloma acuminatum
d. Cherubism

42. Teeth that are present at birth present as unstable, with undeveloped roots are termed:
a. Dens invaginatus
b. Supernumerary teeth
c. Natal teeth
d. Microdontia

43. Clinical signs of Paget disease involve all of the following except which one?
a. Increased spacing between teeth
b. Ill-fitting dentures
c. More prevalent in African American males
d. There is a decrease in radiodensity

44. Select the entity that exhibits signs of kidney stones, join pain, resorption of bone, Brown tumors, malocclusion, and loss of lamina dura.
a. Paget disease
b. Osteomalacia
c. Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
d. Hyperparathyroidism

45. Hemophilia is a genetic autosomal dominant deficiency of clotting factors of Vlll or lX in the blood. What is the name associated with this disorder occurring in males and females?
a. William’s disease of blood
b. Von Willebrand disease
c. Christmas disease
d. Klinefelter syndrome

46. The dentigerous cyst (follicular cyst) occurs around the crowns of an unerupted or developing tooth. They arise from a cystic change in the dental follicle. What other fact listed below is NOT commonly related to the dentigerous cyst.
a. The cyst is unilocular and sometimes multilocular
b. The most frequent location is the third molar region
c. The dentigerous cyst commonly occurs in the 20 to 30 age range
d. It is the most common type of an inflammatory odontogenic cyst
47. The Nasolabial cyst that is found in the soft tissues of the lip lateral to the midline, in the mucolabial fold near the maxillary canine, and in the floor of the nose is categorized as:
a. A developmental cyst
b. Pseudocyst
c. Primordial cyst
d. Residual cyst

48. Most people will clear the HPV virus in time. What is the usual amount of time for clearance to occur?
a. 2 month
b. 6 months
c. 8 months
d. 12 months

49. A simple bone cyst will usually be seen on radiograph as a large area of the mandible. The descriptor that is most appropriate is which of the following?
a. A small circular cyst-like structure
b. A wide opaque structure
c. A scalloped appearance encircling the roots of existing teeth
d. A ground glass-like appearance

50. What is the most common type of oral lichen planus
a. Plaque type
b. Erosive type
c. Reticular type
d. Atrophic type


Case A


Questions 51–58


Patient: Jeff
Synopsis of Patient History:
Age: 30
Sex: Male
Height: 6’1”
Weight: 180 lb
Vital Signs:
Blood Pressure: 120/80
Pulse rate: 60
Respiration: 16
Medical History:


1. Under the care of a physician        ___Yes  x No
2. Hospitalization within the last 5 years        ___Yes  x No
3. Has had any of the following conditions
Rheumatic fever or rheumatic heart disease        ___Yes  x No
Congenital heart disease (bicuspid aortic valve)        ___Yes  x No
Heart attack        ___Yes  x No
Angina pectoris        ___Yes  x No
Hypertension        ___Yes  x No
Diabetes mellitus        ___Yes  x No
Hepatitis        ___Yes  x No
Bleeding disorder        ___Yes  x No
Fainting spells, seizures, or epilepsy        ___Yes  x No
Asthma        ___Yes  x No
Allergies (medication food)        ___Yes  x No
4. Current Medications
Anticoagulants        ___Yes  x No
Insulin        ___Yes  x No
Antibiotics        ___Yes  x No
Aspirin        ___Yes  x No
Nitroglycerin        ___Yes  x No
High blood pressure        ___Yes  x No
Corticosteroids        ___Yes  x No
Oral contraceptives        ___Yes  x No
Other         
Social History         
Do you use any tobacco products?        ___Yes  x No
Do you consume alcohol Weekly, Daily, Monthly        ___Yes  x No

Daily_____ Weekly_X__Monthly_______         
1. Dental History: The patient, Jeff, has some missing teeth, some caries, and several probing measurements with depths in the 5 mm range. He has been out of the country for several years without dental care during this time. He works in the hospitality area and has been a manager of a small hotel. Recently, Jeff returned to the United States to pursue other positions in the hotel business. Jeff likes to participate in boxing as a hobby and lost some teeth as a result when he did not wear a mouth guard.

2. Chief Complaint: Jeff is complaining of the “fullness he feels in the throat area when he swallows.” He reports he has had difficulty swallowing (dysphagia) for about 6 months but has had no pain. He has not been to an ear, nose, and throat physician since he had difficulty obtaining an appointment. He thought that he would see someone in a dental practice since he knows that he will need dental work. He has noticed the “redness in the back of his mouth” when he looks in the mirror while brushing but now sees only a white, thick plaque in the posterior throat area.

Supplemental Oral Examination Findings


Oral Examination Observations


The posterior throat region is ulcerative and has a plaque appearing mass with a wide distribution of affected tissue. Although the tonsils are present on the left side, the affected tissue blocks identifiable tonsillar tissue. The tissue appears to have a cauliflower-like appearance. Jeff says that the “feeling” has become very annoying, and he has trouble swallowing but is not experiencing pain (Fig. 8.90).




FIG. 8.90HPV infection of the oropharynx originating in the tonsillar tissue region diagnosed as tonsillar 
HPV-related cancer. Courtesy Dr. Alessandro Villa, Miami Cancer Institute, Baptist Health South Florida. Martin Tyler.


UseFig. 8.90to answer the following questions:


51. Given the profile and information about this patient, what do you believe is the primary cause of the irritation in the posterior oral region?
a. Amount of alcohol use causing irritation
b. Possibly HIV infection
c. Possible allergy-related lesions
d. HPV infection

52. What is the most likely concern in this case study?
a. Injury to the tonsillar area
b. A severe infection of the tonsil on the right side
c. Squamous papilloma/Squamous cell carcinoma
d. Ingestion of very hot liquids

53. What is the best course of action for this patient?
a. Suggest that he take antibiotics for at least two weeks and schedule a follow-up appointment
b. Try to remove some of the tissue and submit it for a biopsy
c. Refer patient to an experienced ENT practice or an oral surgery, oral pathology, or oral medicine practice
d. Try to begin some oral hygiene procedures to contain the possible infection

54. Higher rates of HPV oral infections are found in which of the following?
a. Males
b. Females
c. Both males and females

55. The cure rate for HPV oral cancers when found early is:
a. 50%–55%
b. 65%–75%
c. 75%–85%
d. 90%–95%

56. All of the following are representative of contracting the HPV virus except one. Which one is the EXCEPTION?
a. Skin to skin contact
b. Food borne contamination
c. Deep kissing
d. Sexual contact from oral, genital exposure

57. Performing a full dental exam with both intraoral palpation and extraoral palpation is crucial for early detection of an HPV infection. Why is palpation of the cervical chain of lymph nodes and salivary gland tissue so important?
a. The lymph nodes are always enlarged in a disease process
b. The salivary glands produce more saliva with oral diseases
c. HPV has an affinity for the salivary gland ducts
d. The patient may complain of pain in the cervical area of the neck

58. Dysphonia describes which of the following?
a. A lack of taste
b. Painful swallowing
c. Pain with nerve stimulation
d. Hoarseness of the voice


Case B


UseFigs. 8.91 and 8.92to answer questions 60 to 64.




FIG. 8.91The image depicts a raised, blue, moveable contained papule to the left center of the lower lip. Image B histology. Granulation tissue walls off the mucin pool. No epithelial lining is evident. Courtesy Dr. Harvey Kessler.


FIG. 8.92This is the histology of a mucocele. Granulation tissue walls off the mucin pool. No epithelial lining is present. Courtesy Harvey Kessler.
(Fig. 8.91 and Fig. 8.92)




59. The cause of a mucocele (mucus extravasation phenomenon) in Fig. 8.91 would be damage to which of the following?
a. A major salivary gland
b. Wharton’s duct
c. The Glands of Blandin-Nuhn
d. A ruptured salivary accessory gland duct

60. If you were to palpate the area, which of the following would you most likely use as a descriptor?
a. Very firm nodule
b. A painful nodule when compressed
c. The nodule is fixed and non-moveable
d. A nonpainful moveable fluid-filled nodule

61. Which of the following best describes a mucocele?
a. Mucous salivary gland secretion spills into the adjacent tissue
b. A mucocele is lined with epithelium
c. A common location for a mucocele is in the floor of the mouth
d. Mucocele is also known as a sialolith

62. A mucocele contains a surrounding inner tissue. Which of the following lines the mucin pool?
a. Inflamed epithelium
b. Multinucleated giant cells
c. Granulation tissue
d. Adipose tissue

63. What is the most common site for a mucocele?
a. The tongue
b. The palate
c. The lower lip
d. The upper lip

64. Necrotizing Sialometaplasia is due to the necrosis of minor salivary glands. It is believed to be caused by which of the following?
a. A bacterial component
b. Vascular ischemia due to malignancy
c. Trauma to salivary tissue due to mechanical issue such as anesthesia
d. A viral component affecting the minor salivary glands



References
1. Fantozzi PJ, et al. JADA Foundational Science 3© 2024;:100031 http://jadafs.ada.org.
2. Allard R. The thyroglossal cyst. Head Neck Surg. 1982;5:134–146.
3. Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology 5th ed. Elsevier 2024;.
4. Alsoghier A, AlBagieh H, AlSahman L, Alshagroud R, AlSahman R. Proliferative verrucous/multifocal leukoplakia: Updates and literature review "case report". Medicine (Baltimore). 2023;102(21):e33783 https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000033783 PMID: 37233434; PMCID: PMC10219708.
5. Langlais RP, Miller GS, Nield-Gehrig JS. Color Atlas of Common Oral Diseases 4th ed. Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 2009;.
6. Zumsteg ZS, Luu M, Rosenberg PS, et al. Global epidemiologic patterns of oropharyngeal cancer incidence trends. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2023;115(12):1544–1554 https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djad169.
7. DeLong L, Burkhart NW. General and Oral Pathology for The Dental Hygienist-Enhanced. 3rd ed. Jones & Bartlett Learning; 2019.
8. Glick M. Burket’s Oral Medicine 12th ed. People’s Medical Publishing House 2015;.
9. Hassan Saad R, Halawa SM, Zidan AM, Emara NM, Abdelghany OA. Malignant transformation of oral squamous cell papilloma: a case report. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2020;75:348–351 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijscr.2020.09.064 Epub 2020 Sep 14. PMID: 32980707; PMCID: PMC7522575.
Suggested Readings
Cawson et al., 1994 Cawson RA, Binnie WH, Eveson JW. Oral Disease: Clinical and Pathologic Correlations 2nd ed. Wolfe Publishing 1994;.
DeLong and Burkhart, 2019 DeLong L, Burkhart NW. General and Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist-Enhanced 3rd ed. Jones & Bartlett Learning 2019;.
Cawson et al., 1994 Cawson RA, Binnie WH, Eveson JW. Color Atlas of Disease: Clinical and Pathologic Correlations 2nd ed. Wolfe Publishing 1994;.
Glick, 2015 Glick M. Burket’s Oral Medicine 12th ed. People’s Medical Publishing House 2015;.
Harnsberger, 1992 Harnsberger H. Handbook of Head and Neck Imaging 2nd ed. Mosby-Yearbook 1992;1184–1243.
Hood et al., 1993 Hood AF, Kwan TH, Mihm MC, Horn TD. Primer of Dermopathology 2nd ed. Walsworth 1993;.
Ibsen and Peters, 2023 Ibsen OAC, Peters SM. Oral Pathology for the Dental Hygienist 8th ed. Elsevier 2023;.
Langlais et al., 2009 Langlais RP, Miller GS, Geh RIG JS. Color Atlas of Common Oral Diseases 4th ed. Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 2009;.
Neville et al., 2024 Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology 5th ed. Elsevier 2024;.
Neville et al., 2015 Neville BW, Damm DD, Allen CM, Chi AC. Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology 4th ed. Elsevier Saunders 2015;.
Regezi et al., 2017 Regezi J, Sciubba J, Jordan RCK. Oral Pathology: Clinical Pathologic Correlations 7th ed. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders; 2017;.
CDC Recommendations for Shingles/Herpes Zoster CDC Recommendations for Shingles/Herpes Zoster. https://www.cdc.gov/shingles/hcp/vaccine-considerations/index.html#:~:text=CDC%20recommends%202%20doses%20of,will%20be%20immunodeficient%20or%20immunosuppressed.
JADA Foundational Science Seer data on neoplasia. JADA Foundational Science Seer data on neoplasia. (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by=nc-nd/4.0) htts://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfscie.2024.100031.